Before you go
Leave your itinerary with a trusted friend or family member, along with a designated call-in
time for your return. Describe your car and where you’ll park.Register at the appropriate park
office or trailhead kiosk. Put a note on your dashboard, detailing your route and
estimated return time.Bring all necessary maps or photocopy the essential map
pages from a book.
Pack a signaling device, such as a whistle or mirror.
Carry a reliable fire starter, such as a butane lighter or flint striker.
Determine an emergency bearing to hike to a road or a town.
Do a gear shakedown at the trailhead, if you’re in a group.
How to avoid a potentially crippling response to emergencies
You hear the crunch of snapping bones a second before pain flares up your leg.
You look down; a gopher hole has wrecked your ankle, turning a pleasant solo
hike into a survival epic. Fear surges through your brain, and your body
begins to shake. What’s going on?
Know the symptoms. Panic is both a physical and a mental reaction, and it can occur
independent of shock. You’re likely to experience an adrenaline
spike, muscle trembling, throat constriction, hyperventilation, loss
of fine motor skills, nausea, and/or dizziness. Your mind may react
with hallucinations, irritability, and a movie reel of worst-case
scenarios culminating in your death. These responses can spiral
out of control and cloud your judgment.
Tame your emotions
“Anxiety is fueled by catastrophic thoughts,” says Jonathan Abramowitz,
a professor of psychology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill. To check the spiral, sit down and breathe deeply. Tackle a right-brain
task, like taping your ankle.
Apply logic. Once you’ve calmed down, “you need to analyze your situation and think
rationally,” says Abramowitz. Instead of trying to solve the emergency all at once,
focus on one small task at a time. Eat. Drink. Look for shelter. Study your map for
escape routes and water sources. Test your ankle. If it doesn’t work, pitch your tent.
Collect wood. Build a signal fire. And so on.
Promote the positive
Don’t worry about the distance to your car, recommends Gino Ferri, author of The Psychology of Wilderness Survival. Remind yourself of your training, and repeat a helpful phrase such as, “I can do this.” Think about family and friends,and the story you’ll tell about this experience.How to avoid a potentially crippling response to emergencies. You hear the crunch of snapping bones a second before pain flares up your leg. You look down; a gopher hole has wrecked your ankle, turning a pleasant solo hike into a survival epic. Fear surges through your brain, and your body
begins to shake. What’s going on?Know the symptoms
Panic is both a physical and a mental reaction, and it can occur
independent of shock. You’re likely to experience an adrenaline
spike, muscle trembling, throat constriction, hyperventilation, loss
of fine motor skills, nausea, and/or dizziness. Your mind may react
with hallucinations, irritability, and a movie reel of worst-case
scenarios culminating in your death. These responses can spiral
out of control and cloud your judgment.
Tame your emotions “Anxiety is fueled by catastrophic thoughts,” says Jonathan Abramowitz,
a professor of psychology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill. To check the spiral, sit down and breathe deeply. Tackle a right-brain
task, like taping your ankle.
Apply logic
Once you’ve calmed down, “you need to analyze your situation and think
rationally,” says Abramowitz. Instead of trying to solve the emergency all at once,
focus on one small task at a time. Eat. Drink. Look for shelter. Study your map for
escape routes and water sources. Test your ankle. If it doesn’t work, pitch your tent.
Collect wood. Build a signal fire. And so on.
Promote the positive
Don’t worry about the distance to your car, recommends Gino Ferri, author of The Psychology of Wilderness Survival .Remind yourself of your training, and repeat a helpful phrase such as, “I can do this.” Think about family and friends, and the story you’ll tell about this experience. Edible Plants: Edible Plants
Acorn: Boil to remove bitter tannins. Those from white oaks (rounded leaves) and pin oaks (pointy leaves) are less tannic.
Cattail: Eat the cucumber-like cores of young
shoots, or mash the starch-filled rhizomes (horizontal rootstalks).
Clover: These sweet-tasting leaves and roots
can be eaten raw or steamed like spinach.
Daisy: Pick and eat the young green leaves, or boil the dried white flowers for a bitter tea. Yucca
Slice, peel, and boil the stems; the white petals and thumb-sized fruits can be eaten raw during the summer.
Pine tree: Cut and boil needles for tea rich in vitamin C; eat the protein-rich brown-and-yellow pollen cones in spring.Thaw cold feet: Swing your leg forcefully back and forth, like a pendulum.
Inertia will force the blood to the tips of your toes. Estimate your distance traveled. The average footstep is 30 inches, and a fit person can walk 3 mph over flat ground. Determining how far you’ve walked is critical for navigating through a whiteout or dense forest—or if you’re trying to pinpoint the exact location of a trail junction or landmark. Find north using a clock face
Hold an analog watch flat, with the hour hand aimed at the sun. Southwill be halfway between the hour hand and 12. North is 180 degrees in the opposite direction. Adjust for daylight saving time by using 1:00 instead of noon. If you wear a digital watch, draw a clock face on the ground. This technique works for North America below Alaska, but it should only be used for emergency navigation. Always bring a compass and a map of your route.Orient yourself using the moon
If the crescent moon rises before the sun goes down (a first-quarter moon), its illuminated side will face west. If it rises after midnight (a last-quarter moon),the bright side will face east. (Using the North Star is easier and more reliable, but try this lunar method if stars are obscured.)Find a natural bandage Gather dried sphagnum moss—soft, bushy, green clumps—from
bogs or swamps. WWI soldiers used it to stanch their wounds because it’s
antibacterial and as absorbent as cotton. Press it against a bleeding wound, or bind it on top of a sterile pad afterthe blood clots. Escape biting insects Seek out windy spots, or apply mud to exposed skin.Rub flakes of birchbark on your skin and clothing—the oil repels bugs. Mosquitoes are attracted to wet and dark-colored clothing, as well as to perspiration. They are most active at dawn and dusk, when the air is calm. Identify a coral snake. Remember: “Red on yellow, kill a fellow. Red on black, friend of Jack.” Poisonous coral snakes, with adjacent red and yellow bands and a black head, live predominantly in the Southeast and Southwest. Similar-looking scarlet king snakes, with their adjacent red and black bands, are harmless constrictors that range from Florida to New Jersey. Rewarm frostbitten skin
Place the white, waxy frozen skin in lukewarm water or apply hot, wet cloths until it becomes pink as blood flow returns. Never apply dry heat; frostbitten skin burns easily. To avoid damaging tissue, don’t rub or massage skin. Taking ibuprofen manages pain and can reduce the chance of blood clots. How to Self-arrest without an ice axe
Roll onto your stomach, facing uphill. Push up with your elbows
to shift more weight to your legs and feet. Your body will create a
natural wedge as your boots dig into the ground.
Fix a broken shoelace
If your lace is too short, skip the eyelets near the toes. Just lace
up the ankle and cuff of the boot to achieve a tight fit. If you lose an
entire shoelace, cut the other one in half.
Find north using the stick-and-shadow method
When the sun is casting shadows, place a 3-foot stick vertically
into flat ground. Clear the area around it of debris. Mark the
tip of the stick’s shadow with a stone (A). Wait at least
15 minutes and mark the end of the shadow again (B).
The line connecting the marks roughly coincides with the
east-west line. A line perpendicular to this line through
the central stick indicates the north-south line. Identify and treat heat exhaustion
A victim will be sweating heavily, with cool, wet, flushed skin.
Dizziness, vomiting, headache, and a rapid pulse are also
possible. Have the person lie down in a cool, shaded place.
Elevate the feet, fan the person, spritz with water, and provide
cool drinks and salty snacks.
Ascend a scree slope
Scree slopes often provide obstruction-free access to higher
elevations, but they can also be tiring to climb. Kick a step with
your toe into the loose stones and shift your weight onto your
forward foot. Repeat by bringing your back foot up.
Descend a scree slope
Walk using short, shuffling steps with
your feet pointed downhill while dig-
ging in your heels. In open areas
without hazards such as cliffs or
boulders, try taking longer, plunging steps as if you were descending
powder snow. An ice axe or trekking
poles are helpful. Group members
should move close together or side by
side to avoid dislodging rocks that could
injure someone moving below.
Make water from snow
Melt snow over a stove by adding a little water to the mixture.
Choose the wettest snow you can find. Icicles also work. No
fire? Fill a bottle one-third full with snow or ice and one-third
with water. Shake it well and place it between layers of clothing.
Do not put the container next to your skin; it will rob your body
of heat through conduction. Easy treatments for 2 common trail injuries
Minor ankle sprain
Cause A bad landing or misstep that twists your foot inward,
tearing the lateral ligaments.
Treatment If your foot can bear some weight, it’s probably
a minor sprain or fracture. Swelling can set in quickly, so sit
down and begin RICE (Rest, Ice, Compress, Elevate). Bind the
ankle with an Ace bandage (or sock) soaked in cool water,
while keeping it elevated. After 20 minutes, wrap your ankle
tightly, or apply tape in a stirrup pattern (down one side,
under, up the other side) followed by figure 8’s around the
ankle. After resting, pop some ibuprofen and try to walk using
a trekking pole. If you feel extreme pain or can’t even limp,
you could have a serious sprain or fracture. Stay put, continue
with RICE, and initiate an assisted rescue.
Bleeding wound
Cause Slash from a branch, rock, or errant blade.
Treatment Stop the bleeding by applying direct pressure.
As bandages become soaked, don’t remove them; place more
on top. Once the bleeding stops, irrigate the cut with high-
pressure water pumped from a filter or squeezed from a
plastic bag. Be sure to remove all flakes of dirt or dried blood
to reduce the chance of infection. Close the wound with a
butterfly bandage, or use several quarter-inch strips of duct
tape, leaving space between them for fluid to escape. Secure
a nonsticky dressing over the closure. Apply clean bandages
each day and check periodically for signs of infection such as
redness, swelling, pus, or a fever. Escape an avalanche
If you’re caught in a snowslide, move your arms and legs in
swimming motions to remain near the surface and upright. Grab
any objects that you can push off against to maintain your balance.
As the slide slows down, cup your palms in front of your face to
create a breathing space before the snow hardens around you.
Estimate daylight
Approximately four fingers of your outstretched
hand between the sun and horizon indicate
1 hour of sunlight remaining. Each additional
finger represents 15 more minutes of daylight.
Know your water needs
In a temperate climate, a person loses an
average of 1.5 liters of water every 24
hours through sweating, breathing, and
urination. Physical exertion and high
heat can increase that loss to as much
as 1 liter per hour. The minimum level of
necessary water replacement depends
on the air temperature and your activity
level. If you’re resting at 80°F, you’ll need
to consume a minimum of 1 liter every 24
hours to stay alive. If your water supplies
are limited, you need to stay in the shade and avoid exertion.
Collect dew
Wrap absorbent clothing around your lower legs and walk through
tall, dew-covered grasses. Then wring the moisture from the
clothing into a container or your mouth.
Backcountry shelter:  Debris shelter
Build this with pine boughs
and forest undergrowth in a
sheltered spot. Use leaf litter
as insulation between
you and the ground. Platform shelter
If the ground is too wet for a debris
shelter, build a platform. Find two
large trees and lash stout branch-
es between them, 3 to 4 feet off the
ground. Overhead, hang a tarp or
cloth on branches lashed between
the trees. >> Tree pit
Dig a foxhole in the
snow beneath a
tree with thick, low
branches, typically an
evergreen. Line it with
leaves or pine boughs;
the snow will reflect
your body heat. Splint a broken arm
Wrap a deflated sleeping pad tightly
around the broken limb; secure the pad
with pack straps, and then inflate it. No
pad? Place straight sticks as splints on
either side of the arm and secure them
with straps or cloth strips. Don’t tie knots
directly against the skin. Immobilize the
limb by securing it against the victim’s
body. For wrist fractures, rest the forearm
on a flat piece of bark and suspend
it horizontally with straps from the torso and neck. Tie a prusik loop
Besides the bowline, the prusik loop is another knot that can save
your life. Tie it to a climbing rope using smaller-diameter cord
(usually 5-mm to 7-mm nylon) to use for ascents and descents
along the main rope. As a friction knot, it grips the line when
your weight is on the loop but slides easily when the pressure
is released.Make rope
Peel away the outer bark of dead tree trunks to get at the long
strands of dried inner bark. Or strip and roll together the fibrous
stalks of hemp plants such as dogbane, which has red stems
and smooth leaves and grows along riverbanks and marshes.
Signal distress
Build a large X (as large as you can make it) on the ground with
rocks or gear; signal SOS (three dots, three dashes, three more
dots) with a whistle or a mirror; or wave your arms in a circle if
you are spotted. For signal fires, create black smoke by burning
petroleum products.heet bend
Best for tying together two ropes of unequal diameter. Taut-line hitch
Sliding knot for adding tension to tent or tarp lines.Trucker’s hitch
Tie-down knot used to secure heavy loads. A level head is your best tool when a hike goes awry.
Calm down Rash decisions will only make you more lost, so get out of the weather and
assess your situation, says Brian Wheeler, founder of the Northwest School of Survival.
Your top priorities are keeping warm, dry, and hydrated.
Take an inventory Check your water, food, and gear. If you’re low on water, consider return-
ing to the last known source, especially in an arid environment. If bad weather or nightfall
is imminent, pitch your tent or build a shelter. Becoming chilled or dehydrated will diminish
your confidence and your ability to problem-solve.
Stay put Often, hikers aren’t as lost as they think they are, Wheeler says. But unless you’re
confident of finding the exact spot where you took a wrong turn, don’t try backtracking. If
nothing looks familiar, locate a water source, find shelter, and start signaling with a whistle,
fire, or mirror. “The environment and physical condition of the hiker will dictate the best
decision,” says Wheeler.
Set priorities Lost hikers often erroneously focus on getting “unlost” instead of taking care
of their basic needs, according to Scott Robertson, a senior NOLS instructor. Don’t compound
the problem by wandering without a plan, neglecting water supplies, ignoring your core
temperature, and falsely convincing yourself that you remember a terrain feature. Getting
lost was your first mistake. Make sure it’s not the first of many.




The beauty and wonder of Mount Rainier National Park doesn’t come just from the scenic grandeur of a single, towering mountain. The presence of wild creatures remains part of the experience of unblighted wilderness. Being in the home of large creatures like bear and mountain lion can make Mount Rainier an exciting—and sometimes scary—place to visit. Though you are not likely to see them, if you do meet one of these larger mammals, learning more about them serves as your best defense. If You See a Bear • Do NOT approach it. • Stop, stand upright, and do NOT run. • If a bear approaches you or your camp, try to scare it away by yelling, making noise, banging pots and pans, etc. • Back away slowly. • If you are attacked, fight back aggressively. • Report all sightings to the nearest ranger station or call (360) 569-6600. Bears And Food Much more commonly seen than mountain lions, black bears aren’t nearly as shy. These large and curious opportunists are mostly vegetarian—about 90% of their food consists of grasses, flowering plants, roots, and berries. Only 10% of their diet comes from animals— usually insects and carrion. Bears have one of the most highly developed senses of smell, and like most wild animals, they are always looking for the easiest meal. Storing your food properly is the best way to protect yourself and future campers from negative bear encounters—and ultimately protect the bear from being destroyed. If a bear gets food from you, it will likely become more aggressive with the next campers it meets. • Keep food and toiletries in your car; if you are backpacking, hang food, toiletries, and trash from a tree or bear pole at least 10 feet up and 4 feet out from the trunk, or use a bear-resistant food canister. • Keep your tent, clothes, and sleeping bags free of food smells, and store the clothes you wore while cooking with your food. • Put trash in bear-proof garbage cans, or pack it out with you. • Never bury garbage or burn it in a campfire because bears can dig it out.


Cougars, also called mountain lions or pumas, are common at Mount Rainier, but rarely seen. These large, grey to reddish-tan cats live solitary lives and shy away from people. In the twilight hours, they hunt deer and occasionally elk, as well as smaller animals. A hiker would be extremely lucky to glimpse one of their long, black tipped tails disappearing into the forest. Cougar encounters are very uncommon. No one in Mount Rainier National Park has ever been injured by a cougar—you are much more at risk of having a car accident, getting stung by a bee, or being struck by lightning. However, encounters seem to be increasing nationwide. More cougar attacks have occurred in the last 20 years than in the previous 80. Human development and loss of habitat appear to be a primary cause. 


• Hike in a group rather than alone. • Avoid running—people running or moving rapidly act like prey and increase their risk. • Keep children close to you—preferably in view just ahead of you. • Be alert to your surroundings. • Watch for tracks and signs—cougar scat looks like large dog scat with lots of hair in it. • Avoid dead animals, especially partiallycovered deer or elk carcasses. • Never approach cougar kittens–leave the area immediately, as the mother is likely nearby. • Keep a clean camp and properly store food. • Follow the rules regarding pets in the park—don’t take your pet on trails or in the backcountry. • Keep your pet on a leash at all times and never leave it unattended at the campground—you could lose your pet.


• DON’T RUN! Stand still and face the lion with your companions. • Immediately pick up and hold small children. • Stand upright, open your jacket, and try to make yourself appear larger. • Shout and make noise. • If attacked, fight back aggressively. • Report all sightings to the nearest ran


1. Attractants: Wildlife may be drawn into an area of human activity due to the attraction of food, and water sources. 2. Habituation: A habituated animal has learned through repeated encounters with people that there is little to fear and don’t avoid people like normal wild animals. 3. Food-conditioning: Wild animals become food conditioned when they are attracted to human foods or garbage because previous food rewards have given them positive reinforcement for this behaviour. Secure refuse bins and check school grounds for unattended food (i.e.. uneaten lunches/snacks). People can take action to reduce attractants, habituation, and food conditioning to reduce the risk of conflict. Coyotes have become more prevalent with the attraction of food sources (garbage) and prey (rabbits). In addition, schools must educate children about wildlife in their area and what to do when encountering wild animals. The following actions should be part of an education program: • Be aware that any wild animal may attack if it senses a threat to itself, its young or its food source. • Never feed or approach a wild animal (avoid bird feeders near schools). • Teach children how to recognize wildlife and how to respond in an encounter. • In wilderness areas, walk as a group and make noise to scare animals away (whistle or air horn). In areas where bear presence is higher, consider carrying bear spray. • Keep pets on a leash and under control. • If you encounter an animal, never run as this may provoke a chase and attack. • Ensure the animal has an escape route and if you have encountered an animal, slowly back away.


Cold Weather Survival U.S. Army Survival Manual Survival by Environment Of course, you can never be fully prepared for the worst, but people in the U.S. Army spend a lot of time thinking about worst case scenarios. So we've pulled the most valuable advice from the U.S. Army Survival Manual to help you stay alive in the wild. Disclaimer: The information provided in this guide is for informational and entertainment purposes only. By using this website, you agree that you will not hold Discovery liable for any actions taken based on information provided. Use this information at your own risk. One of the most difficult survival situations is a cold weather scenario. Every time you venture into the cold, you are pitting yourself against the elements. With a little knowledge of the environment, proper plans and appropriate equipment, you can overcome the elements. As you remove one or more of these factors, survival becomes increasingly difficult. Remember, winter weather is highly variable. Prepare yourself to adapt to blizzard conditions even during sunny and clear weather. Cold is a far greater threat to survival than it appears. It decreases your ability to think and weakens your will to do anything except to get warm. Cold is an insidious enemy; as it numbs the mind and body, it subdues the will to survive. Cold makes it very easy to forget your ultimate goal — to survive. COLD REGIONS AND LOCATIONS Cold regions include arctic and subarctic areas and areas immediately adjoining them. You can classify about 48 percent of the Northern Hemisphere's total landmass as a cold region due to the influence and extent of air temperatures. Ocean currents affect cold weather and cause large areas normally included in the temperate zone to fall within the cold regions during winter periods. Elevation also has a marked effect on defining cold regions. Within the cold weather regions, you may face two types of cold weather environments — wet or dry. Knowing in which environment your area of operations falls will affect planning and execution of a cold weather operation. Wet Cold Weather Environments Wet cold weather conditions exist when the average temperature in a 24-hour period is -10 degrees C or above. Characteristics of this condition are freezing during the colder night hours and thawing during the day. Even though the temperatures are warmer during this condition, the terrain is usually very sloppy due to slush and mud. You must concentrate on protecting yourself from the wet ground and from freezing rain or wet snow. Dry Cold Weather Environments 2 Dry cold weather conditions exist when the average temperature in a 24-hour period remains below -10 degrees C. Even though the temperatures in this condition are much lower than normal, you do not have to contend with the freezing and thawing. In these conditions, you need more layers of inner clothing to protect you from temperatures as low as -60 degrees C. Extremely hazardous conditions exist when wind and low temperature combine. WINDCHILL Windchill increases the hazards in cold regions. Windchill is the effect of moving air on exposed flesh. For instance, with a 27.8-kph (15-knot) wind and a temperature of -10 degrees C, the equivalent windchill temperature is -23 degrees C. Remember, even when there is no wind, you will create the equivalent wind by skiing, running, being towed on skis behind a vehicle, and working around aircraft that produce wind blasts. BASIC PRINCIPLES OF COLD WEATHER SURVIVAL It is more difficult for you to satisfy your basic water, food and shelter needs in a cold environment than in a warm environment. Even if you have the basic requirements, you must also have adequate protective clothing and the will to survive. The will to survive is as important as the basic needs. There have been incidents when trained and well-equipped individuals have not survived cold weather situations because they lacked the will to live. Conversely, this will has sustained individuals less well-trained and equipped. You must not only have enough clothing to protect you from the cold, you must also know how to maximize the warmth you get from it. For example, always keep your head covered. You can lose 40 percent to 45 percent of body heat from an unprotected head and even more from the unprotected neck, wrists and ankles. These areas of the body are good radiators of heat and have very little insulating fat. The brain is very susceptible to cold and can stand the least amount of cooling. Because there is much blood circulation in the head, most of which is on the surface, you can lose heat quickly if you do not cover your head. There are four basic principles to follow to keep warm. An easy way to remember these basic principles is to use the word "COLD" — C - Keep clothing clean. O - Avoid overheating. L - Wear clothes loose and in layers. D - Keep clothing dry. 3 C - Keep clothing clean. This principle is always important for sanitation and comfort. In winter, it is also important from the standpoint of warmth. Clothes matted with dirt and grease lose much of their insulation value. Heat can escape more easily from the body through the clothing's crushed or filled up air pockets. O - Avoid overheating. When you get too hot, you sweat and your clothing absorbs the moisture. This affects your warmth in two ways: dampness decreases the insulation quality of clothing and as sweat evaporates, your body cools. Adjust your clothing so that you do not sweat. Do this by partially opening your parka or jacket, by removing an inner layer of clothing, by removing heavy outer mittens or by throwing back your parka hood or changing to lighter headgear. The head and hands act as efficient heat dissipaters when overheated. L - Wear your clothing loose and in layers. Wearing tight clothing and footgear restricts blood circulation and invites cold injury. It also decreases the volume of air trapped between the layers, reducing its insulating value. Several layers of lightweight clothing are better than one equally thick layer of clothing, because the layers have dead-air space between them. The dead-air space provides extra insulation. Also, layers of clothing allow you to take off or add clothing layers to prevent excessive sweating or to increase warmth. D - Keep clothing dry. In cold temperatures, your inner layers of clothing can become wet from sweat and your outer layer, if not water repellent, can become wet from snow and frost melted by body heat. Wear water-repellent outer clothing, if available. It will shed most of the water collected from melting snow and frost. Before entering a heated shelter, brush off the snow and frost. Despite the precautions you take, there will be times when you cannot keep from getting wet. At such times, drying your clothing may become a major problem. You can place damp socks or mittens, unfolded, near your body so that your body heat can dry them. In a campsite, hang damp clothing inside the shelter near the top, using drying lines or improvised racks. You may even be able to dry each item by holding it before an open fire. Dry leather items slowly. If no other means are available for drying your boots, put them between your sleeping bag shell and liner. Your body heat will help to dry the leather. A heavy, down-lined sleeping bag is a valuable piece of survival gear in cold weather. Ensure the down remains dry. If wet, it loses a lot of its insulation value. If you do not have a sleeping bag, you can make one out of parachute cloth or similar material and natural dry material, such as leaves, pine needles or moss. Place the dry material between two layers of the parachute material. Other important survival items are a knife; waterproof matches in a waterproof container, preferably one with a flint attached; a durable compass; map; watch; waterproof ground cloth and cover; flashlight; binoculars; dark glasses; fatty emergency foods; food gathering gear; and signaling items. Remember, a cold weather environment can be very harsh. Give a good deal of thought to selecting the right equipment for survival in the cold. If unsure of an item you have never used, test it in an "overnight backyard" environment before venturing further. Once you have selected 4 items that are essential for your survival, do not lose them after you enter a cold weather environment. HYGIENE Although washing yourself may be impractical and uncomfortable in a cold environment, you must do so. Washing helps prevent skin rashes that can develop into more serious problems. In some situations, you may be able to take a snow bath. Take a handful of snow and wash your body where sweat and moisture accumulate, such as under the arms and between the legs, and then wipe yourself dry. If possible, wash your feet daily and put on clean, dry socks. Change your underwear at least twice a week. If you are unable to wash your underwear, take it off, shake it and let it air out for an hour or two. If you are using a previously occupied shelter, check your body and clothing for lice each night. If your clothing has become infested, use insecticide powder if you have any. Otherwise, hang your clothes in the cold, then beat and brush them. This will help get rid of the lice, but not the eggs. If you shave, try to do so before going to bed. This will give your skin a chance to recover before exposing it to the elements. MEDICAL ASPECTS When you are healthy, your inner core temperature (torso temperature) remains almost constant at 37 degrees C (98.6 degrees F). Since your limbs and head have less protective body tissue than your torso, their temperatures vary and may not reach core temperature. Your body has a control system that lets it react to temperature extremes to maintain a temperature balance. There are three main factors that affect this temperature balance — heat production, heat loss and evaporation. The difference between the body's core temperature and the environment's temperature governs the heat production rate. Your body can get rid of heat better than it can produce it. Sweating helps to control the heat balance. Maximum sweating will get rid of heat about as fast as maximum exertion produces it. Shivering causes the body to produce heat. It also causes fatigue that, in turn, leads to a drop in body temperature. Air movement around your body affects heat loss. It has been calculated that a naked man exposed to still air at or about 0 degrees C can maintain a heat balance if he shivers as hard as he can. However, he can't shiver forever. It has also been calculated that a man at rest wearing the maximum arctic clothing in a cold environment can keep his internal heat balance during temperatures well below freezing. To withstand really cold conditions for any length of time, however, he will have to become active or shiver. COLD INJURIES The best way to deal with injuries and sicknesses is to take measures to prevent them from happening in the first place. Treat any injury or sickness that occurs as soon as possible to prevent it from worsening. 5 The knowledge of signs and symptoms and the use of the buddy system are critical in maintaining health. Following are cold injuries that can occur. Hypothermia Hypothermia is the lowering of the body temperature at a rate faster than the body can produce heat. Causes of hypothermia may be general exposure or the sudden wetting of the body by falling into a lake or spraying with fuel or other liquids. The initial symptom is shivering. This shivering may progress to the point that it is uncontrollable and interferes with an individual's ability to care for himself. This begins when the body's core (rectal) temperature falls to about 35.5 degrees C (96 degrees F). When the core temperature reaches 35 to 32 degrees C (95 to 90 degrees F), sluggish thinking, irrational reasoning and a false feeling of warmth may occur. Core temperatures of 32 to 30 degrees C (90 to 86 degrees F) and below result in muscle rigidity, unconsciousness and barely detectable signs of life. If the victim's core temperature falls below 25 degrees C (77 degrees F), death is almost certain. To treat hypothermia, rewarm the entire body. If there are means available, rewarm the person by first immersing the trunk area only in warm water of 37.7 to 43.3 degrees C (100 to 110 degrees F). CAUTION: Rewarming the total body in a warm water bath should be done only in a hospital environment because of the increased risk of cardiac arrest and rewarming shock. One of the quickest ways to get heat to the inner core is to give warm water enemas. Such an action, however, may not be possible in a survival situation. Another method is to wrap the victim in a warmed sleeping bag with another person who is already warm; both should be naked. CAUTION: The individual placed in the sleeping bag with the victim could also become a hypothermia victim if left in the bag too long. If the person is conscious, give him hot, sweetened fluids. One of the best sources of calories is honey or dextrose; if unavailable, use sugar, cocoa or a similar soluble sweetener. CAUTION: Do not force an unconscious person to drink. There are two dangers in treating hypothermia — rewarming too rapidly and "after drop." Rewarming too rapidly can cause the victim to have circulatory problems, resulting in heart failure. After drop is the sharp body core temperature drop that occurs when taking the victim from the warm water. Its probable muse is the return of previously stagnant limb blood to the core (inner torso) area as recirculation occurs. Concentrating on warming the core area and stimulating peripheral circulation will lessen the effects of after drop. Immersing the torso in a warm bath, if possible, is the best treatment. Frostbite 6 This injury is the result of frozen tissues. Light frostbite involves only the skin that takes on a dull, whitish pallor. Deep frostbite extends to a depth below the skin. The tissues become solid and immovable. Your feet, hands and exposed facial areas are particularly vulnerable to frostbite. The best frostbite prevention, when you are with others, is to use the buddy system. Check your buddy's face often and make sure that he checks yours. If you are alone, periodically cover your nose and lower part of your face with your mittened hand. The following pointers will aid you in keeping warm and preventing frostbite when it is extremely cold or when you have less than adequate clothing: Face. Maintain circulation by twitching and wrinkling the skin on your face by making faces. Warm with your hands. Ears. Wiggle and move your ears. Warm with your hands. Hands. Move your hands inside your gloves. Warm by placing your hands close to your body. Feet. Move your feet and wiggle your toes inside your boots. A loss of feeling in your hands and feet is a sign of frostbite. If you have lost feeling for only a short time, the frostbite is probably light. Otherwise, assume the frostbite is deep. To rewarm a light frostbite, use your hands or mittens to warm your face and ears. Place your hands under your armpits. Place your feet next to your buddy's stomach. A deep frostbite injury, if thawed and refrozen, will cause more damage than a nonmedically trained person can handle. Trench Foot and Immersion Foot These conditions result from many hours or days of exposure to wet or damp conditions at a temperature just above freezing. The symptoms are a sensation of pins and needles, tingling, numbness and then pain. The skin will initially appear wet, soggy, white and shriveled. As it progresses and damage appears, the skin will take on a red and then a bluish or black discoloration. The feet become cold, swollen and have a waxy appearance. Walking becomes difficult and the feet feel heavy and numb. The nerves and muscles sustain the main damage but gangrene can occur. In extreme cases, the flesh dies and it may become necessary to have the foot or leg amputated. The best prevention is to keep your feet dry. Carry extra socks with you in a waterproof packet. You can dry wet socks against your torso (back or chest). Wash your feet and put on dry socks daily. Dehydration When bundled up in many layers of clothing during cold weather, you may be unaware that you are losing body moisture. Your heavy clothing absorbs the moisture that evaporates in the air. You must drink water to replace this loss of fluid. Our need for water is as great in a cold environment as it is in a warm environment. One way to tell if you are becoming dehydrated is to check the color of your urine on snow. If your urine makes the snow dark yellow, you are 7 becoming dehydrated and need to replace body fluids. If it makes the snow light yellow to no color, your body fluids have a more normal balance. Cold Diuresis Exposure to cold increases urine output. It also decreases body fluids that you must replace. Sunburn Exposed skin can become sunburned even when the air temperature is below freezing. The sun's rays reflect at all angles from snow, ice and water, hitting sensitive areas of skin — lips, nostrils and eyelids. Exposure to the sun results in sunburn more quickly at high altitudes than at low altitudes. Apply sunburn cream or lip salve to your face when in the sun. Snow Blindness The reflection of the sun's ultraviolet rays off a snow-covered area causes this condition. The symptoms of snow blindness are a sensation of grit in the eyes, pain in and over the eyes that increases with eyeball movement, red and teary eyes, and a headache that intensifies with continued exposure to light. Prolonged exposure to these rays can result in permanent eye damage. To treat snow blindness, bandage your eyes until the symptoms disappear. You can prevent snow blindness by wearing sunglasses. If you don't have sunglasses, improvise. Cut slits in a piece of cardboard, thin wood, tree bark or other available material. Putting soot under your eyes will help reduce shine and glare. Constipation It is very important to relieve yourself when needed. Do not delay because of the cold condition. Delaying relieving yourself because of the cold, eating dehydrated foods, drinking too little liquid and irregular eating habits can cause you to become constipated. Although not disabling, constipation can cause some discomfort. Increase your fluid intake to at least 2 liters above your normal 2 to 3 liters daily intake and if available, eat fruit and other foods that will loosen the stool. Insect Bites Insect bites can become infected through constant scratching. Flies can carry various diseaseproducing germs. To prevent insect bites, use insect repellent, netting and wear proper clothing. SHELTERS Your environment and the equipment you carry with you will determine the type of shelter you can build. You can build shelters in wooded areas, open country and barren areas. Wooded areas usually provide the best location, while barren areas have only snow as building material. 8 Wooded areas provide timber for shelter construction, wood for fire, concealment from observation and protection from the wind. Note: In extreme cold, do not use metal, such as an aircraft fuselage, for shelter. The metal will conduct away from the shelter what little heat you can generate. Shelters made from ice or snow usually require tools such as ice axes or saws. You must also expend much time and energy to build such a shelter. Be sure to ventilate an enclosed shelter, especially if you intend to build a fire in it. Always block a shelter's entrance, if possible, to keep the heat in and the wind out. Use a rucksack or snow block. Construct a shelter no larger than needed. This will reduce the amount of space to heat. A fatal error in cold weather shelter construction is making the shelter so large that it steals body heat, rather than saving it. Keep shelter space small. Never sleep directly on the ground. Lay down some pine boughs, grass or other insulating material to keep the ground from absorbing your body heat. Never fall asleep without turning out your stove or lamp. Carbon monoxide poisoning can result from a fire burning in an unventilated shelter. Carbon monoxide is a great danger. It is colorless and odorless. Any time you have an open flame, it may generate carbon monoxide. Always check your ventilation. Even in a ventilated shelter, incomplete combustion can cause carbon monoxide poisoning. Usually, there are no symptoms. Unconsciousness and death can occur without warning. Sometimes, however, pressure at the temples, burning of the eyes, headache, pounding pulse, drowsiness or nausea may occur. The one characteristic, visible sign of carbon monoxide poisoning is a cherry red coloring in the tissues of the lips, mouth and inside of the eyelids. Get into fresh air at once if you have any of these symptoms. There are several types of field-expedient shelters you can quickly build or employ. Many use snow for insulation. Snow Cave Shelter The snow cave shelter is a most effective shelter because of the insulating qualities of snow. Remember that it takes time and energy to build and that you will get wet while building it. First, you need to find a drift about 3 meters deep into which you can dig. While building this shelter, keep the roof arched for strength and to allow melted snow to drain down the sides. Build the sleeping platform higher than the entrance. Separate the sleeping platform from the snow cave's walls or dig a small trench between the platform and the wall. This platform will prevent the melting snow from wetting you and your equipment. This construction is especially important if you have a good source of heat in the snow cave. Ensure the roof is high enough so that you can sit up on the sleeping platform. Block the entrance with a snow block or other material and use the lower entrance area for cooking.The walls and ceiling should be at least 30 centimeters thick. Install a ventilation shaft. If you do not have a drift large enough to build a snow cave, you can make a variation of it by piling snow into a mound large enough to dig out. Snow Trench Shelter 9 The idea behind this shelter is to get you below the snow and wind level and use the snow's insulating qualities. If you are in an area of compacted snow, cut snow blocks and use them as overhead cover. If not, you can use a poncho or other material. Build only one entrance and use a snow block or rucksack as a door. Snow Block and Parachute Shelter Use snow blocks for the sides and parachute material for overhead cover. If snowfall is heavy, you will have to clear snow from the top at regular intervals to prevent the collapse of the parachute material. Snow House or Igloo In certain areas, the natives frequently use this type of shelter as hunting and fishing shelters. They are efficient shelters but require some practice to make them properly. Also, you must be in an area that is suitable for cutting snow blocks and have the equipment to cut them (snow saw or knife). Lean-To Shelter Construct this shelter in the same manner as for other environments; however, pile snow around the sides for insulation. Fallen Tree Shelter To build this shelter, find a fallen tree and dig out the snow underneath it. The snow will not be deep under the tree. If you must remove branches from the inside, use them to line the floor. Tree-Pit Shelter Dig snow out from under a suitable large tree. It will not be as deep near the base of the tree. Use the cut branches to line the shelter. Use a ground sheet as overhead cover to prevent snow from falling off the tree into the shelter. If built properly, you can have 360-degree visibility. FIRE Fire is especially important in cold weather. It not only provides a means to prepare food, but also to get warm and to melt snow or ice for water. It also provides you with a significant psychological boost by making you feel a little more secure in your situation. If you are in hostile territory, remember that the smoke, smell and light from your fire may reveal your location. Light reflects from surrounding trees or rocks, making even indirect light a source of danger. Smoke tends to go straight up in cold, calm weather, making it a beacon during the day, but helping to conceal the smell at night. In warmer weather, especially in a wooded area, smoke tends to hug the ground, making it less visible in the day but making its odor spread. 10 If you are in enemy territory, cut low tree boughs rather than the entire tree for firewood. Fallen trees are easily seen from the air. All wood will burn, but some types of wood create more smoke than others. For instance, coniferous trees that contain resin and tar create more and darker smoke than deciduous trees. There are few materials to use for fuel in the high mountainous regions of the Arctic. You may find some grasses and moss but very little. The lower the elevation, the more fuel available. You may find some scrub willow and small, stunted spruce trees above the tree line. On sea ice, fuels are seemingly nonexistent. Driftwood or fats may be the only fuels available to a survivor on the barren coastlines in the arctic and subarctic regions. Abundant fuels within the tree line are — Spruce trees are common in the interior regions. As a conifer, spruce makes a lot of smoke when burned in the spring and summer months. However, it burns almost smoke-free in late fall and winter. The tamarack tree is also a conifer. It is the only tree of the pine family that loses its needles in the fall. Without its needles, it looks like a dead spruce but it has many knobby buds and cones on its bare branches. When burning, tamarack wood makes a lot of smoke and is excellent for signaling purposes. Birch trees are deciduous and the wood burns hot and fast, as if soaked with oil or kerosene. Most birches grow near streams and lakes, but occasionally you will find a few on higher ground and away from water. Willow and alder grow in arctic regions, normally in marsh areas or near lakes and streams. These woods burn hot and fast without much smoke. Dried moss, grass and scrub willow are other materials you can use for fuel. These are usually plentiful near streams in tundras (open, treeless plains). By bundling or twisting grasses or other scrub vegetation to form a large, solid mass, you will have a slower burning, more productive fuel. If fuel or oil is available from a wrecked vehicle or downed aircraft, use it for fuel. Leave the fuel in the tank for storage, drawing on the supply only as you need it. Oil congeals in extremely cold temperatures; therefore, drain it from the vehicle or aircraft while still warm if there is no danger of explosion or fire. If you have no container, let the oil drain onto the snow or ice. Scoop up the fuel as you need it. CAUTION: Do not expose flesh to petroleum, oil and lubricants in extremely cold temperatures. The liquid state of these products is deceptive in that it can cause frostbite. Some plastic products, such as disposable spoons, helmet visors, visor housings and foam rubber, will ignite quickly from a burning match. They will also burn long enough to help start a fire. For example, a plastic spoon will burn for about 10 minutes. In cold weather regions, there are some hazards in using fires, whether to keep warm or to cook. For example — 11 Fires have been known to burn underground, resurfacing nearby. Therefore, do not build a fire too close to a shelter. In snow shelters, excessive heat will melt the insulating layer of snow. A fire inside a shelter lacking adequate ventilation can result in carbon monoxide poisoning. A person trying to get warm or to dry clothes may become careless and burn or scorch his clothing and equipment. Melting overhead snow may get you wet, bury you and your equipment, and possibly extinguish your fire. In general, a small fire and some type of stove is the best combination for cooking purposes. A "hobo stove" is particularly suitable to the Arctic. It is easy to make out of a tin can and it conserves fuel. A bed of hot coals provides the best cooking heat. Coals from a crisscross fire will settle uniformly. Make this type of fire by crisscrossing the firewood. A simple crane propped on a forked stick will hold a cooking container over a fire. For heating purposes, a single candle provides enough heat to warm an enclosed shelter. A small fire about the size of a man's hand requires very little fuel, yet it generates considerable warmth and is hot enough to warm liquids. WATER There are many sources of water in the Arctic and subarctic. Your location and the season of the year will determine where and how you obtain water. Water sources in arctic and subarctic regions are more sanitary than in other regions due to the climatic and environmental conditions. However, always purify the water before drinking it. During the summer months, the best natural sources of water are freshwater lakes, streams, ponds, rivers and springs. Water from ponds or lakes may be slightly stagnant but still usable. Running water in streams, rivers and bubbling springs is usually fresh and suitable for drinking. The brownish surface water found in a tundra during the summer is a good source of water. However, you may have to filter the water before purifying it. You can melt freshwater ice and snow for water. Completely melt both before putting them in your mouth. Trying to melt ice or snow in your mouth takes away body heat and may cause internal cold injuries. If on or near pack ice in the sea, you can use old sea ice to melt for water. In time, sea ice loses its salinity. You can identify this ice by its rounded corners and bluish color. You can use body heat to melt snow. Place the snow in a water bag and place the bag between your layers of clothing. This is a slow process but you can use it on the move or when you have no fire. 12 Note: Do not waste fuel to melt ice or snow when drinkable water is available from other sources. When ice is available, melt it, rather than snow. One cup of ice yields more water than one cup of snow. Ice also takes less time to melt. You can melt ice or snow in a water bag, tin can or improvised container by placing the container near a fire. Begin with a small amount of ice or snow in the container and, as it turns to water, add more ice or snow. Another way to melt ice or snow is by putting it in a bag made from porous material and suspending the bag near the fire. Place a container under the bag to catch the water. During cold weather, avoid drinking a lot of liquid before going to bed. Crawling out of a warm sleeping bag at night to relieve yourself means less rest and more exposure to the cold. Once you have water, keep it next to you to prevent refreezing. Also, do not fill your canteen completely. Allowing the water to slosh around will help keep it from freezing. FOOD There are several sources of food in the arctic and subarctic regions. The type of food — fish, animal, fowl or plant — and the ease in obtaining it depend on the time of the year and your location. Fish During the summer months, you can easily get fish and other water life from coastal waters, streams, rivers and lakes. The North Atlantic and North Pacific coastal waters are rich in seafood. You can easily find crawfish, snails, clams, oysters and king crab. In areas where there is a great difference between the high and low tide water levels, you can easily find shellfish at low tide. Dig in the sand on the tidal flats. Look in tidal pools and on offshore reefs. In areas where there is a small difference between the high and low tide water levels, storm waves often wash shellfish onto the beaches. The eggs of the spiny sea urchin that lives in the waters around the Aleutian Islands and southern Alaska are excellent food. Look for the sea urchins in tidal pools. Break the shell by placing it between two stones. The eggs are bright yellow in color. Most northern fish and fish eggs are edible. Exceptions are the meat of the arctic shark and the eggs of the sculpins. The bivalves, such as clams and mussels, are usually more palatable than spiral-shelled seafood, such as snails. WARNING: The black mussel, a common mollusk of the far north, may be poisonous in any season. Toxins sometimes found in the mussel's tissue are as dangerous as strychnine. The sea cucumber is another edible sea animal. Inside its body are five long, white muscles that taste much like clam meat. 13 In early summer, smelt spawn in the beach surf. Sometimes you can scoop them up with your hands. You can often find herring eggs on the seaweed in midsummer. Kelp, the long ribbonlike seaweed, and other smaller seaweed that grow among offshore rocks are also edible. Sea Ice Animals You find polar bears in practically all arctic coastal regions but rarely inland. Avoid them if possible. They are the most dangerous of all bears. They are tireless, clever hunters with good sight and an extraordinary sense of smell. If you must kill one for food, approach it cautiously. Aim for the brain; a bullet elsewhere will rarely kill one. Always cook polar bear meat before eating it. CAUTION: Do not eat polar bear liver as it contains a toxic concentration of vitamin A. Earless seal meat is some of the best meat available. You need considerable skill, however, to get close enough to an earless seal to kill it. In spring, seals often bask on the ice beside their breathing holes. They raise their heads about every 30 seconds, however, to look for their enemy, the polar bear. To approach a seal, do as the Eskimos do — stay downwind from it, cautiously moving closer while it sleeps. If it moves, stop and imitate its movements by lying flat on the ice, raising your head up and down and wriggling your body slightly. Approach the seal with your body sideways to it and your arms close to your body so that you look as much like another seal as possible. The ice at the edge of the breathing hole is usually smooth and at an incline, so the least movement of the seal may cause it to slide into the water. Therefore, try to get within 22 to 45 meters of the seal and kill it instantly (aim for the brain). Try to reach the seal before it slips into the water. In winter, a dead seal will usually float but it is difficult to retrieve from the water. Keep the seal blubber and skin from coming into contact with any scratch or broken skin you may have. You could get "spekk-finger," that is, a reaction that causes the hands to become badly swollen. Keep in mind that where there are seals, there are usually polar bears, and polar bears have stalked and killed seal hunters. You can find porcupines in southern subarctic regions where there are trees. Porcupines feed on bark; if you find tree limbs stripped bare, you are likely to find porcupines in the area. Ptarmigans, owls, Canadian jays, grouse and ravens are the only birds that remain in the Arctic during the winter. They are scarce north of the tree line. Ptarmigans and owls are as good for food as any game bird. Ravens are too thin to be worth the effort it takes to catch them. Ptarmigans, which change color to blend with their surroundings, are hard to spot. Rock ptarmigans travel in pairs and you can easily approach them. Willow ptarmigans live among willow clumps in bottomlands. They gather in large flocks and you can easily snare them. 14 During the summer months all arctic birds have a two- to three-week molting period during which they cannot fly and are easy to catch. Skin and butcher game while it is still warm. If you do not have time to skin the game, at least remove its entrails, musk glands and genitals before storing. If time allows, cut the meat into usable pieces and freeze each separately so that you can use the pieces as needed. Leave the fat on all animals except seals. During the winter, game freezes quickly if left in the open. During the summer, you can store it in underground ice holes. Plants Although tundras support a variety of plants during the warm months, all are small when compared to plants in warmer climates. For instance, the arctic willow and birch are shrubs, rather than trees. See a list of some plant foods found in arctic and subarctic regions. ARCTIC FOOD PLANTS • Arctic raspberry and blueberry • Arctic willow • Bearberry • Cranberry • Crowberry • Dandelion • Eskimo potato • Fireweed • Iceland moss • Marsh marigold • Reindeer moss • Rock tripe • Spatterdock WEATHER SIGNS There are several good indicators of climatic changes. Wind You can determine wind direction by dropping a few leaves or stalks of grass or by watching the treetops. Once you determine the wind direction, you can predict the type of weather that is imminent. Rapidly shifting winds indicate an unsettled atmosphere and a likely change in the weather. Clouds 15 Clouds come in a variety of shapes and patterns. A general knowledge of clouds and the atmospheric conditions they indicate can help you predict the weather. Smoke Smoke rising in a thin vertical column indicates fair weather. Low rising or "flattened out" smoke indicates stormy weather. Birds and Insects Birds and insects fly lower to the ground than normal in heavy, moisture-laden air. Such flight indicates that rain is likely. Most insect activity increases before a storm, but bee activity increases before fair weather. Low-Pressure Front Slow-moving or imperceptible winds and heavy, humid air often indicate a low-pressure front. Such a front promises bad weather that will probably linger for several days. You can "smell" and "hear" this front. The sluggish, humid air makes wilderness odors more pronounced than during high-pressure conditions. In addition, sounds are sharper and carry farther in low-pressure than high-pressure conditions. As a survivor in an arctic or subarctic region, you will face many obstacles. Your location and the time of year will determine the types of obstacles and the inherent dangers. You should — Avoid traveling during a blizzard. Take care when crossing thin ice. Distribute your weight by lying flat and crawling. Cross streams when the water level is lowest. Normal freezing and thawing action may cause a stream level to vary as much as 2 to 2.5 meters per day. This variance may occur any time during the day, depending on the distance from a glacier, the temperature and the terrain. Consider this variation in water level when selecting a campsite near a stream. Consider the clear arctic air. It makes estimating distance difficult. You more frequently underestimate, rather than overestimate, distances. Do not travel in "whiteout" conditions. The lack of contrasting colors makes it impossible to judge the nature of the terrain. Always cross a snow bridge at right angles to the obstacle it crosses. Find the strongest part of the bridge by poking ahead of you with a pole or ice ax. Distribute your weight by crawling or by wearing snowshoes or skis. Make camp early so that you have plenty of time to build a shelter. 16 Consider frozen or unfrozen rivers as avenues of travel. However, some rivers that appear frozen may have soft, open areas that make travel very difficult or may not allow walking, skiing or sledding. Use snowshoes if you are traveling over snow-covered terrain. Snow 30 or more centimeters deep makes traveling difficult. If you do not have snowshoes, make a pair using willow, strips of cloth, leather or other suitable material. It is almost impossible to travel in deep snow without snowshoes or skis. Traveling by foot leaves a well-marked trail for any pursuers to follow. If you must travel in deep snow, avoid snow-covered streams. The snow, which acts as an insulator, may have prevented ice from forming over the water. In hilly terrain, avoid areas where avalanches appear possible. Travel in the early morning in areas where there is danger of avalanches. On ridges, snow gathers on the lee side in overhanging piles called cornices. These often extend far out from the ridge and may break loose if stepped on. 


One appeal of outdoor adventure is that you get to unplug and enjoy quiet time away from the city. Because that also means you're farther from emergency responders and urgent care clinics, it's important to be well-versed in wilderness first aid. Think of it as your opportunity to become more capable and self-sufficient.The vast majority of incidents outdoors are minor and easily treatable. When providing aid in the wilderness, most of the time your goal is to keep a condition from worsening so you can continue with your adventure. That said, it's important to be prepared for any situation. The first thing you learn in a wilderness first-aid course is how to evaluate a patient, which includes the following steps:
1. Size up the scene
2. Identify life threats
3. Do a focused exam: head-to-toe check, vital signs and patient history
4. Make a problem list and care plan, which includes an evacuation decision
5. Treat the patient, providing both medical and emotional support
6. Monitor how the patient is doing
We recommend you take a wilderness first-aid class to learn both basic patient assessment and how to treat a variety of medical conditions. REI has partnered with NOLS Wilderness Medicine to offer that training at many REI stores: Getting yourself a reference book for a full range of medical issues is also helpful: Remember: Safety is your responsibility. No article or video can replace the advice of a physician, nor professional instruction and experience. Make sure you're practiced in proper techniques and safety requirements before you render first aid. f you've already had some general first-aid training, it's worth noting how wilderness first aid may differ. There are four primary factors:
1. Time: It's a long way to the doctor's office and wilderness search and rescue personnel simply can't respond as quickly as when we dial 9-1-1 in the city. In the backcountry it could be hours or days until your patient gets professional care, so you need to be ready to render emergency aid and to care for that person for an extended period of time.
2. Environment: You may face extremes of weather and different types of physical hazards than you would encounter in the city.
3. Resources: When you're administering aid in the backcountry, you're limited to what's in your pack and what you can use from your surrounding environment. A good wilderness medicine class should cover what to carry in your first-aid kit.
4. Communication: Even with expanding cellphone coverage, your ability to call for help from the backcountry is limited; that means your providing care might be the patient's only option.
Say you're out hiking and come upon someone who is bleeding and unconscious. Your first instinct might be run to them to offer aid. However, you need to ensure you don't become a casualty yourself, and that you understand the situation before rushing to begin treatment. That's why you need to follow these steps before doing anything else:
1. Determine whether the area is safe: Ensure no further harm is imminent—for both patient and responders. If a rockslide caused the injury, for example, you might need to move the patient out of the path of additional rockfall.
2. Identify the Mechanism of Injury (MOI). Look around to determine what might have caused the accident or injury. That provides clues to the type of injuries that might be present.
3. Form a general impression of the seriousness of the situation. If the patient is injured, how injured? If the person is sick, how sick?
4. Determine the number of patients. Don't assume that the most obviously injured person is the only one in need of assessment and care.
5. Protect yourself: Prudent caregiver practice is to assume all people are infectious. Put on gloves and a mask, and wash hands thoroughly before and after patient contact. (NOLS refers to this as Body Substance Isolation (BSI).)
Wilderness First Aid: Initial Patient Assessment Once you've determined that it's safe for you to begin treating your patient, your next actions should be to identify any immediate threats to the patient's life. Before you begin a preliminary life-threat exam, begin with two quick steps:
1. Obtain consent to treat (if the person is conscious). Ask the person if you can help. If the answer is "yes," then ask their name, symptoms and what happened.
2. Establish responsiveness. Attempt to wake the patient if they aren't responding. (If there is any possibility of a spine injury, you also need to carefully place your hands on either side of the person's head and keep the patient still.)
Next, you will begin your life threat exam. NOLS calls this an "ABCDE" exam, using the mnemonic device to help you remember the steps:
1. Airway check: Look in the mouth and check the airway for obstructions.
2. Breathing check: Look closely at the chest; listen and feel for signs of respiration.
3. Circulation check: Check for a pulse and for major wounds that are bleeding.
4. Disability decision: If you can't rule out a spine injury, continue to protect it.
5. Expose injuries: Without moving the patient, open up clothing covering serious injuries so you can fully evaluate and treat them. Whether you check for major bleeding (C) first or for breathing issues (A and B) first depends on your initial judgment at the scene. If you suspect a major wound, check and stabilize it first. Deal with any immediate life-threatening conditions found during the ABCDE exam. Those might include removing airway obstructions, doing CPR or applying direct pressure to major bleeding. Once the patient is out of initial danger, you can begin a more thorough examination. Wilderness First Aid: Secondary Patient Assessment After you've done your initial patient assessment, you'll gather information to make your treatment plan, inform your evacuation decision and to pass on to medical professionals who later care for the patient. You might also choose to relocate the patient to a more stable, more sheltered site at this time. The procedures below highlight key stages of the secondary exam. A wilderness first-aid course will take you through the process involved in each procedure: Do a Head-to-toe Exam: Start by ensuring your hands are clean, warm and gloved. Then explain to the patient what you're doing: methodically going over all areas of the body looking for clues about potential injuries or illness. Your analysis includes several methods of detection:
1. Look: for blood and other bodily fluids, discoloration or unusual shapes
2. Listen: for airway noises or unusual sounds when joints are moved
3. Feel: for wounds, deformities and unexpected hardness, softness or tenderness
4. Smell: for unusual odors
5. Ask: if anything hurts or feels odd or numb
Check Vital Signs: Check the time and write all of the vital signs down. One helpful tip is to write them on a piece of tape and place it on the patient's leg so the information travels with them when additional help arrives. Here's what you'll take notes on:
1. Level of responsiveness: Is the patient awake and oriented? Awake and disoriented? Or is your patient unconscious or unresponsive?
2. Heart rate: Using the wrist pulse, check the number of beats per minute and note whether the pulse is strong or weak; regular or irregular.
3. Respiration rate: Check the patient's number of breaths per minute and note whether the breathing is easy or labored.
4. Skin signs: Look at skin color, temperature and moisture. The inside rim of the lower eye or inside the lower lip are good places to check for color. Is it pink or pale? Is the rest of their skin warm and dry vs. cool and clammy? If possible, also record the patient's temperature with a thermometer.
Do a Patient History: Ask questions to learn valuable information to help you with your assessment and treatment. For example, you might find that your patient missed taking important medications or didn't drink enough water on a hot day. To cover the important topics, ask them about the following:
1. Chief complaint: Ask the following questions: What is your most significant concern? When did it start? What makes it worse or better? Where is it located? How severe is it?
2. How old are they?
3. Symptoms: Ask if the patient can provide additional details about the chief complaint, or if they have other conditions or concerns.
4. Allergies: Are there severe ones? (Food and medicine are common ones; also ask about bees.) What are the patient's reactions to their allergies?
5. Medications: Get as many details as possible for both prescription and over-the-counter drugs.
6. Pertinent medical history: Find out if they have any medical conditions that require them to see a doctor for treatment.
7. Last fluid/food intake, last urine/bowel output: How long ago and how much?
8. Events: Ask if they know what caused the event and for details leading up to it.
Wilderness First Aid: Making a Treatment Plan
Go over all of the information you've gathered and make a treatment plan, including anticipated problems. Then follow your plan while monitoring the patient's health closely and ensuring that they are as comfortable as possible.
Treating Medical Issues: Depending on the type of medical issue and severity of the problem, you may be able to treat your patient and you can both continue on with your wilderness adventures. Taking a Wilderness First Aid class will help you learn about a variety of medical issues, and what you should do for them, including:
* Spine and head injuries
* Shock
* Wounds and infections, burns and blisters
* Bone and soft-tissue injuries
* Heat exhaustion and heat stroke
* Hypothermia and frostbite
* Altitude illness
* Lightning-related injuries
* Allergic reactions (including snakes, scorpions and insects)
* Chest pain, shortness of breath, altered mental status


Making an Evacuation Decision: Whenever a condition is serious, you have to decide whether to evacuate and by what means: helicopter, carried by rescuers or with you and the patient walking out under your own power. That's a complex decision based on specific symptoms, how the patient is doing, the availability of rescue resources and the remoteness of your location, among other things.
Wilderness First Aid Tips
If possible, have someone of the same gender perform the head-to-toe exam. Have someone help the examiner by writing down observations and vital signs. Assign other tasks, like boiling water for drinks or setting up camp, so that the patient feels like care is orderly and all rescuers have a role. Try to keep the patient clean, warm and comfortable at all times. If you are waiting for help to arrive, things like shelter, sustenance and general nursing care will be key to maintaining patient well-being. Fluids are more important than food; avoid caffeinated and sugary drinks. Offer emotional support and empathy. Inform the patient about all aspects of care and involve them in evacuation decisions. Resupply and/or supplement your first-aid kit before each trip (consider a larger tube of antibiotic ointment or more dressing materials, among other things)




During the Hike
Stay on the Trail
Most accidents happen when hikers leave the established
trail and disregard warning signs. Staying on the trail
greatly reduces your chances of having a serious fall or
getting lost. Hawaiian forests are not like mainland
forests—the growth is very dense, and it is easy to
become disoriented. Thick overgrowth can mask dangerously steep drop-offs. Thin, sharp lava rock can crack
beneath your weight above deep holes or lava tubes.
Stay Together
Hikers separated from their partners are more apt to
make a wrong turn or lose the established trail. Keep
track of each other, and regroup periodically, especially
near junctions or when the trail gets obscure. Monitor
everyone’s condition. Dehydration, sunstroke, hypothermia, and fatigue can hit even experienced hikers.
Avoid Undue Risks
Climbing waterfalls and following narrow ridgelines or
gulches off the trail can place you in danger. Rock climbing is extremely dangerous due to the crumbly and
porous nature of the volcanic rock. There have been fatal
accidents from crumbling rock...don’t take the chance.
Monitor the Weather
Keep an eye on the sky. When hiking into valleys or
crossing streams, be mindful of rain conditions along the
mountain top or ridges that can suddenly raise the water
level in the stream. Use extreme caution if attempting to
cross a swollen stream...rushing water is very powerful.
It is better to find an alternative route, or wait until the
water subsides.
Watch the Time
Hawai‘i does not have daylight savings time, and night
falls quickly in the tropics. Getting a late start increases
the possibility of getting caught in the dark. Know your
turnaround time and stick to it to allow enough time to
return. If you’re caught by darkness, stay put unless you
are very familiar with the trail and have a flashlight
you’re on and what happened.
Be Visible: Wear or wave a brightly colored item in an
open area during the day. At night, use a flashlight or camera flash.
Be Noisy: Use a whistle to attract attention.
Stay Calm: Objectively assess your situation before making any decision. Stay calm and positive.
Stay Put: You will be found more quickly and reduce the
chances of getting into further trouble, especially after dark,
by staying in one place. This is why it is important to notify
someone of your hike location and destination.
Stay Warm: Wind and
rain can drain your body of
warmth, and be life-threatening. Get out of the wind
and use your rain gear or
extra clothes to stay warm.
Thunderstorms,Tornadoes,Lightning...
A PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Including Tornado Safety Information for Schools
 
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
Thunderstorms,Tornadoes,Lightning...
A PREPAREDNESS GUIDE
Including Tornado Safety Information for Schools
 
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationNational Weather Service
...Nature’s Most Violent Storms
...Nature’s Most Violent StormsThunderstorms, Tornadoes, Lightning...
Introduction
For Americans, preparedness must now account for man-made disasters as well as natural ones. Knowing what to do during an emergency is an important part of being prepared and may make all the difference when seconds count. Some of the things you can do to prepare for the unexpected, such as mak-ing an emergency supply kit and developing an emergency plan, are the same for both a natural or man-made emergency. This preparedness guide explains thunderstorms and related hazards and suggests life-saving actions YOU can take.  With this information, YOU can recognize severe weather, develop a plan, and be ready to act when threat-ening weather approaches.  Remember, your safety, and the safety of those in your care, is up to YOU!
Why Worry About Thunderstorms?  
Lightning...
         ■         Causes        an        average        of        55-60        fatalities        and        400        injuries        each        year         ■         Occurs        with        all        thunderstorms         ■         Costs        more        than        $1        billion        in        insured        losses        each        year
Tornadoes...
         ■         Cause        an        average        of        60-65        fatalities        and        1,500        injuries        each        year         ■         Can        produce        wind        speeds        in        excess        of        200        mph         ■         Can        be        1        mile        wide        and        stay        on        the        ground        over        50        miles
Straight-line Winds...
         ■         Can        exceed        125        mph         ■         Can        cause        destruction        equal        to        a        tornado         ■         Are        extremely        dangerous        to        aviation
Flash Floods and Floods...
         ■         Are        the        #1        cause        of        deaths        associated        with        thunderstorms,        more                            than        90        fatalities        each        year
Hail...
         ■         Can        be        larger        than        a        softball        (5        inches        in        diameter)         ■         Causes        more        than        $1        billion        in        crop        and        property        damage            each year
1A PREPAREDNESS GUIDEIncluding Tornado Safety  Information for Schools
Thunderstorms
A thunderstorm affects a relatively small area when compared to a          hurricane        or        a        winter        storm.        The        typical        thunderstorm        is        15        miles        in         diameter        and        lasts        an        average        of        30        minutes.                Despite        their        small        size,         ALL        thunderstorms        are        dangerous!                Of        the        estimated        100,000        thunder-storms        that        occur        each        year        in        the        United        States,        about        10        percent        are         classified        as        severe.                
What Are Thunderstorms?  What Causes Them?
Every Thunderstorm Needs:
         ■         Moisture—to form clouds and rain         ■        Unstable air—warm air that can rise rapidly         ■        Lift—caused by cold or warm fronts, sea breezes,                               mountains, or the sun’s heat 
The Thunderstorm Life CycleThe National Weather  Service considers a  thunderstorm severe if it produces hail at least one inch in diameter, winds of  58 mph or stronger, or  a tornado.
Developing Stage
■         Towering        cumulus        cloud        indicates rising air■         Usually        little        if        any        rain        during this stage■         Lasts        about        10        minutes■         Occasional        lightningMature Stage
■         Most        likely        time        for        hail,        heavy        rain,        frequent        lightning,        strong        winds, and tornadoes■         Storm        occasionally        has        a        black                or dark green appearance■         Lasts        an        average        of        10        to         20        minutes        but        some        storms                may last much longerDissipating Stage
■         Downdrafts,        downward        flowing        air, dominate the storm■         Rainfall        decreases        in        intensity■         Can        still        produce        a        burst        of         strong winds■         Lightning        remains        a        danger2
1,800 thunderstorms occur at any moment around the world.   That’s 16 million a year!...Nature’s Most Violent StormsThunderstorms, Tornadoes, Lightning...
Tornadoes 
Although tornadoes occur in many parts of the world, they are found most                   frequently        in        the        United        States.                In        an        average        year,        1,200        tornadoes        cause        60-65        fatalities        and        1,500        injuries        nationwide.                You        can        find        more         information on tornadoes at www.spc.noaa.gov.
Tornado Facts
         ■         A        tornado        is        a        violently        rotating        column        of        air        extending        from        a                          cumuliform cloud, such as a thunderstorm, to the ground.         ■         Tornadoes        may        appear        nearly        transparent        until        dust        and        debris           are picked up or a cloud forms within the funnel.  The average   tornado moves from southwest to northeast, but tornadoes can    move in any direction and can suddenly change their direction   of motion.         ■         The        average        forward        speed        of        a        tornado        is        30        mph        but        may        vary                                 from        nearly        stationary        to        70        mph.         ■         The        strongest        tornadoes        have        rotating        winds        of        more                   than        200        mph.         ■         Tornadoes        can        accompany        tropical        storms        and        hurricanes        as           they move onto land.         ■         Waterspouts        are        tornadoes        that        form        over        warm        water.                Water                  spouts can move onshore and cause damage to coastal areas.
Be Ready Year Round
         ■         Tornadoes        can        occur        at        any        time         of        day,        any        day        of        the        year.         ■         Have        a        plan        of        action        before        severe        weather        threatens.                You        need                                 to        respond        quickly        when        a        warning        is        issued        or        a        tornado        is        spotted.         ■         When        conditions        are        warm,        humid,        and        windy,        or        skies        are        threat-         ening, monitor for severe weather watches and warnings by listen-          ing        to        NOAA        Weather        Radio,        logging        onto        weather.gov or tuning    into your favorite television or radio weather information source. 
The Enhanced Fujita Scale
The        National        Weather        Service        (NWS)        uses        the        EF-Scale        to        assign        a        tornado         a ‘rating’ based on estimated wind speeds and related damage.   
EF- SCALEEF RATING 3 Second Wind Gust (mph)065-85186-1102111-1353136-1654166-2005Over 200
3A PREPAREDNESS GUIDEIncluding Tornado Safety  Information for Schools
How Tornadoes Form
Before thunderstorms develop, winds change direction and increase in speed with altitude.  This creates an invisible, horizontal spinning effect in the lower atmosphere.Rising air within the thunderstorm updraft tilts the rotating air from  horizontal to vertical.An        area        of        rotation,        2-6        miles        wide,        now extends through much of the storm.        Most        tornadoes        form        within        this area of strong rotation.
Weak Tornadoes
■         88%        of        all        tornadoes■         Less        than        5%        of        tornado        deaths■         Lifetime        1        –        10+        minutes■         Winds        less        than        110        mph■         Produces        EF0        or        EF1        damageStrong Tornadoes
■         11%        of        all        tornadoes■         Nearly        30%        of        all        tornado        deaths■         May        last        20        minutes        or        longer■         Winds        111-165        mph■         Produces        EF2        or        EF3        damageViolent Tornadoes
■         Less        than        1%        of        all        tornadoes■         70%        of        all        tornado        deaths■         Can        exceed        1        hour■         Winds        greater        than        166        mph■         Produces        EF4        or        EF5        damage
4
Chuck        Doswell        IIIWikimedia/Justin Hobson Wikimedia/Joshua Jans
More detailed information on the EF-Scale can found at:www.spc.noaa.gov/efscale...Nature’s Most Violent StormsThunderstorms, Tornadoes, Lightning...
Weather Radar Watches the Sky
TThe        NWS        has        a        Doppler        radar        network        strategically located across the country that can detect air movement toward or away from the radar. Ear-ly detection of increasing rotation aloft within a thunderstorm can allow life-saving        warnings        to        be        issued        before        the        tornado        forms.                In        Figure        1        Weather        Service        Doppler        radar        detected        strong        rotation        within        the        storm        where        red        colors        (winds        moving        away        from        the        radar)        and        green        (winds        blowing        toward        the        radar)        are        close        together.                Figure        2        reveals        the        “hook        echo”        that        appreared        in        the        radar’s        reflectivity        data.                Figure        3        shows        a        violent        tornado        in        northern        Oklahoma        at        the        same        time        the        radar        image        was        taken.
Tornado Fiction and Fact
FICTION: Lakes, rivers, and mountains protect areas from tornadoes.FACT: No geographic location is safe from tornadoes.  A tornado near Yellowstone        National        Park        left        a        path        of        destruction        up        and        down        a        10,000        foot        mountain.FICTION:        A        tornado        causes        buildings        to        “explode”        
as        the        tornado        passes         overhead.FACT: Violent winds and debris slamming into buildings cause the most structural damage.FICTION:        Open        windows        before        a        tornado        approaches        to        equalize        pressure and minimize damage.FACT: Virtually all buildings leak.  Leave the windows closed.  Take shelter immediately.  An underground shelter, basement or safe room  are the        safest        places.                If        none        of        those        options        are        available,        go        to        a         windowless interior room or hallway.FICTION: Highway overpasses provide safe shelter from tornadoes.FACT: The area under a highway overpass is very dangerous in a tor-nado.                If        you        are        in        a        vehicle,        you        should        immediately        seek        shelter         in a sturdy building.  As a last resort, you can either:  stay in the car        with        the        seat        belt        on.                Put        your        head        down        below        the        windows,        covering        with        your        hands        and        a        blanket        if        possible,        OR        if        you        can         safely get noticeably lower than the level of the roadway, exit your car        and        lie        in        that        area,        covering        your        head        with        your        hands.                Your        choice        should        be        driven        by        your        specific        circumstances.FICTION:        It        is        safe        to        take        shelter        in        the        bathroom,        hallway,        or        closet        of        
a         mobile home.FACT: Mobile        homes        are        not        safe        during        tornadoes!                Abandon        your         mobile        home        to        seek        shelter        in        a        sturdy        building        immediately.                If         you live in a mobile home, ensure you have a plan in place that identifies        the        closest        sturdy        buildings.                                                                                Answers to frequently asked questions about tornadoes can be found at:www.spc.noaa.gov/faq/tornado/index.html
5NOAA/Brian        BillFigure        1
Figure        2
Figure 3A PREPAREDNESS GUIDEIncluding Tornado Safety  Information for Schools
Lightning
What Causes Lightning  
The rising air in a thunderstorm cloud causes various types of frozen precipi-tation        to        form        within        the        cloud.                        Included        in        these        precipitation        types        are         very small ice crystals and much larger pellets of snow and ice.  The smaller ice crystals are carried upward toward the top of the clouds by the rising air while the heavier and denser pellets are either suspended by the rising air or        start        falling        toward        the        ground.                Collisions        occur        between        the        ice        crystals         and the pellets, and these collisions serve as the charging mechanism of the thunderstorm.  The small ice crystals become positively charged while the pel-lets become negatively charged.  As a result, the top of the cloud becomes positively charged and the middle to lower part of the storm becomes nega-tively charged.  At the same time, the ground underneath the cloud becomes charged oppositely of the charges directly overhead.When the charge difference between the ground and the cloud becomes too large, a conductive channel of air develops between the cloud and the ground, and        a        small        amount        of        charge        (step        leader)        starts        moving        toward        the        ground.                  When it nears the ground, an upward leader of opposite charge connects with the step leader.  At the instant this connection is made, a powerful discharge occurs between the cloud and the ground.  We see this discharge as a bright visible        flash        of        lightning.
Lightning Facts
         ■         There        is        no        safe        place        outdoors        when        a        thunderstorm        is        nearby.                 ■         The        vast        majority        of        lightning        victims        were        going        to        a        safe        place        but                 waited too long before seeking safe shelter.         ■         More        than        80%        of        lightning        fatality        victims        are         male, typically between           the        ages        of        15        and        40.         ■         Lightning        fatalities        are        most        common        during        summer        afternoons        and                 evenings.         ■         The        energy        from        one        lightning        flash        could        light        a        100-watt        light        bulb        for                 more than 3 months.         ■         Many        wildfires        in        the        western        United        States        and        Alaska        are        ignited        by                  lightning.         ■         The        channel        of        air        through        which        lightning        passes        can        be        heated        to                         50,000°F—hotter than the surface of the sun!  The rapid heating and   cooling of the air near the lightning channel causes a shock wave that   results in the sound we know as “thunder.” 6
Johnny Autery...Nature’s Most Violent StormsThunderstorms, Tornadoes, Lightning...
How Far Away Is the Lightning?
         ■         Count        the        number        of        seconds        between        a        flash        of        lightning        and        the           sound of the resulting thunder.         ■         Divide        this        number        by        5        to        get        an        estimate        of        the        distance        in        miles        to                 the lightning strike.         ■         Remember,        if        you        are        outdoors        and        can        hear        thunder,        you        are        in                          danger of being struck by lightning.  
Almost all lightning deaths have occurred outdoors.  In recent years, fatal activities have included:
■         boating        ■         standing        under        a        tree        ■         riding        horses        ■         swimming                ■         riding        on        a        lawnmower         ■         playing        sports        ■         golfing                ■         watching        the        storm        ■         walking        ■         loading        a        truck        ■         mountain        climbing         ■         fishing■         camping        ■         running        to        shelter
Lightning Fiction and Fact
FICTION:        If        it        is        not        raining,        then        there        is        no        danger        from        lightning.FACT: Lightning often strikes outside of heavy rain and may occur as far as        10        miles        away        from        any        rainfall.        This        is        especially        true        in        the         western United States where thunderstorms sometimes produce very little rain.FICTION: The rubber soles of shoes or rubber tires on a car will protect you from being struck by lightning.FACT: Rubber-soled        shoes        and        rubber        tires        provide        NO        protection        from         lightning. The steel frame of a hard-topped vehicle provides in-creased protection if you are not touching metal.  Although you may        be        injured        if        lightning        
strikes
        your        car,        you        are        much        safer         inside a vehicle than outside.FICTION:        People        struck        by        lightning        should        not        be        touched        because        they         carry an electrical charge.FACT: Lightning-strike victims carry no electrical charge and should be helped immediately.  Anyone who has been hit by lightning re-quires        immediate        professional        medical        care.                Call        9-1-1        and        begin        CPR        immediately        if        the        person        has        stopped        breathing.                Use        an        Automatic        External        Defibrillator        if        one        is        available.        Contact        your        local        American        Red        Cross        chapter        for        information        on        CPR        and        first        aid        classes.FICTION:        “Heat        lightning”        occurs        after        very        hot        summer        days        and        poses         no threat.FACT: “Heat        lightning”        is        a        term        used        to        describe        lightning        from        a         thunderstorm too far away for the thunder to be heard.
7U.S.        Air        Force/Cherie        A.        ThurlbyWhen Thunder Roars, Go Indoors!A PREPAREDNESS GUIDEIncluding Tornado Safety  Information for Schools
Straight-Line Winds
         ■         Straight-line        winds        are        any        winds        not        associated        with        the        rotation        of                  a tornado.  Straight-line winds are responsible for most thunder   storm wind damage.          ■         Straight-line        winds        can        exceed        125        mph!         ■         A        downburst        is        a        small        area        of        rapidly        descending        air        beneath                   a        thunderstorm        (see        center        of        photographs        above).         ■         A        downburst        can        cause        damage        equivalent        to        a        strong        tornado                                  (tree        damage        in        photo        to        the        right)        and        can        be        extremely        hazardous                 to aviation.         ■         A        “dry        microburst”        is        a        downburst        that        occurs        with        little        or        no        rain.                 These destructive winds are most common in the western           United        States        and        are        a        hazard        that        wildfire        crews        watch-out        for.
Flash Floods and Floods
         ■         A flash flood        occurs        within        a        few        hours        (usually        less        than        6        hours)           of heavy or excessive rainfall, a dam or levee failure, or the sudden           release        of        water        impounded        by        an        ice        jam.         ■         A        flood is the inundation of a normally dry area caused by abnor-          mal        high        water        flow.                Floods        develop        more        slowly        than        flash        floods,                         normally        greater        than        6        hours.         ■         Flash        floods        and        floods        are        the        #1        cause        of        deaths        associated        with                   thunderstorms,        more        than        90        fatalities        each        year.                 ■         More        than        half        of        all        flood-related        drownings        occur        when        a        vehicle                         is        driven        into        hazardous        flood        water.          —TURN AROUND, DON’T DROWN!            ■         Many        flash        flood        fatalities        occur        at        night.         ■        Six inches of fast-moving water can knock you off your feet.         ■        Two feet of rushing water can carry away most vehicles, including   SUVs and pickups. For more information, refer to the “Floods...The Awesome Power” at  weather.gov/os/brochures.shtml
8NOAA/Bill        Bunting
USGS...Nature’s Most Violent StormsThunderstorms, Tornadoes, Lightning...
Hail 
■        Strong rising currents of air within a storm, called updrafts, carry wa-ter droplets to a height where they freeze.■         Ice        particles        grow        in        size,        becoming        too        heavy        to        be        supported        by        the        updraft, and fall to the ground.■        Hail is larger than sleet, and forms only  in thunderstorms.■        Large hailstones can fall at speeds faster than 100        mph!■        The largest hailstone ever recovered in the United States was a 7 inch wide chunk of ice that landed        in        Aurora,        Nebraska,        in        June        2003.                ■        An accurate weight could not be determined for the        Aurora        hailstone.                A        1970        Coffeyville,        Kansas,        hailstone        weighing        1.67        pounds        with        a                5.7        inch        diameter remains the heaviest hailstone weighed and        verified        in        the        United        States.
The Aurora, Nebraska record hailstone 
9From Tornadoes
                                                                People        who        are        in        mobile                                   homes or outdoors.
From Lightning
People        who        are        outdoors,        or        anyone who stays outdoors when thunderstorms are nearby.
From Flash Flooding
People        who        walk        or        drive        through        flood        waters.
From Large Hail
People        who        are        caught outdoors.Who’s Most At-RiskFrom Thunderstorms? 
This map depicts the av-erage number of days with thunderstorms each year.  Florida has more days with thunderstorms than any other state.A PREPAREDNESS GUIDEIncluding Tornado Safety  Information for Schools
Be Prepared
It’s Up to YOU!
Each        year,        many        people        are        killed        or        seriously        injured        by        tornadoes        and         severe thunderstorms despite advance warning.  Some did not hear the warning; others heard the warning but did not believe it would happen to them.  The following preparedness information, combined with timely severe weather        watches        and        warnings,        may        save        your        life.                If        you        hear        a        warning        or         observe threatening skies, only YOU can make the decision to seek safety.  This could be the most important decision you will ever make.
What YOU Can Do Before Severe Weather Strikes
Develop        a        plan        for        you        and        your        family        at        home,        work,        school,        and        when        outdoors.                The        American        Red        Cross        offers        tips        at:                www.redcross.org, and the        Federal        Emergency        Management        Agency        (FEMA)        at:                www.ready.gov
Practice        Your        Plan
Know the risk for the area in which you live or visit.  NWS warnings  ■identify locations in the path of approaching severe weather.  Have        a        Public        Alert™        certified        NOAA        Weather        Radio        and        battery        back-  ■up to receive warnings.Discuss        thunderstorm        safety        with        all        members        of        your        household.                 ■NWS        watches        and        warnings        are        available        on        the        Internet.                        Select        and          ■bookmark        your        local        NWS        office        from        www.weather.gov.Keep in mind that even though the weather may be calm at the time a  ■Tornado or Severe Thunderstorm Watch or Warning is issued for your area, conditions can rapidly deteriorate and become life threatening. Always heed warnings even if warnings issued for your area in the past did        not        result        
in        severe        weather.                Don’t        gamble        with        your        life.Tornadoes and severe thunderstorms can and do occur at any location,  ■anytime of day or night, and anytime of year given the right atmospheric conditions.  Tune into your favorite radio or television weather information source for  ■severe weather watch and warning information.If        severe        weather        threatens,        check        on        people        who        are        elderly,        very          ■young, or physically or mentally disabled.Having a safe room in your home or small business can help provide  ■“near-absolute        protection”        for        you        and        your        family        or        your        employees        from        injury        or        death        caused        by        extreme        winds.                 By        near-absolute         protection we mean that there is a very high probability the occupants of        a        safe        room        built        according        to        current        guidance        will        avoid        injury        or        death.                Information        on        how        to        build        a        Safe        Room        (shown        in        the        photo        at        right)        in        your        home        or        school        is        available        from        FEMA        at:         www.fema.gov/plan/prevent/saferoom/fema320.sht m   
10FEMATom Warner...Nature’s Most Violent StormsThunderstorms, Tornadoes, Lightning...
When Dangerous Weather Approaches
Avoid the Lightning Threat
■        Have a lightning safety plan.  Know where you’ll go for safety and how        much        time        it        will        take        to        get        there.                Make        sure        your        plan        allows         enough time to reach safety.■        Postpone activities.  Before going outdoors, check the forecast for thunderstorms.                Consider        postponing        activities        to        avoid        being        caught         in a dangerous situation.■        Monitor the weather.  Look for signs of a developing thunderstorm such        as        darkening        skies,        flashes        of        lightning,        or        increasing        wind.■        Get to a safe place.                If        you        hear        thunder,        even        a        distant        rumble,         immediately move to a safe place.  When Thunder Roars, Go Indoors!  Fully enclosed buildings with wiring and plumbing provide the best protection.  Sheds, picnic shelters, tents or covered porches do        not        protect        you        from        lightning.                If        a        sturdy        building        is        not        nearby,         get into a hard-topped metal vehicle and close all the windows.  Stay inside        until        30        minutes        after        the        last        rumble        of        thunder.■        If you hear thunder, don’t use a corded phone .                Cordless        phones,                                    cell phones and other wireless handheld devices are safe to use.■        Keep away from electrical equipment, wiring and water pipes. Sensitive        electronics        should        be        unplugged        well        in        advance        of        thunderstorms.                Don’t        take        a        bath,        shower        or        use        other        plumbing         during a thunderstorm.
When Caught Outside During Thunder  
There        is        no        safe        place        outside        during        a        thunderstorm.                Plan        ahead        to        avoid        this        dangerous        situation!                
If        you’re        outside        and        hear        thunder,        the        only        way        to        significantly        reduce        your        risk        of        becoming        a        lightning        casualty        is        to        get         inside a substantial building or hard-topped metal vehicle as fast as you can.  Remember, there is no substitute for getting to a safe place. ■        Avoid open areas and stay away from isolated tall trees, towers, or utility poles.                Do        not        be        the        tallest        object        in        the        area.                Lightning        tends        to        strike        the        tallest        objects        in        the        area.■        Stay away from metal conductors such as wires or fences.  Metal        does        not        attract        lightning,        but        lightning        can        travel        long        distances                  through it.For more information on lightning safety, please visit: www.lightningsafety.noaa.gov
Remember, if you can hear thunder –  you are close enough to be struck  by lightning!
11A PREPAREDNESS GUIDEIncluding Tornado Safety  Information for Schools
Tornado Safety Rules
■        The        safest        place        to        be        is        an        underground        shelter,        basement,        or         safe room.  ■        If        no        underground        shelter        or        safe        room        is        available,        a        small,        windowless         interior room or hallway on the lowest level of a sturdy building is the safest alternative.■        Mobile        homes        are        not        safe        during        tornadoes.                Abandon        mobile        homes         and go to the nearest sturdy building or shelter immediately.■        If        you        are        caught        outdoors,        seek        shelter        in        a        basement,        shelter        or        sturdy        building.                If        you        cannot        quickly        walk        to        a        shelter:                        ■        Immediately        get        into        a        vehicle,        buckle        your        seat        belt        and        try        to        drive         to the closest sturdy shelter.■        If        flying        debris        occurs        while        you        are        driving,        pull        over        and        park.                Now         you have the following options as a last resort:■        Stay in your vehicle with the seat belt on.  Put your head down below the windows, covering with your hands and a blanket if possible.    ■        If you can safely get noticeably lower than the level of the roadway, exit your car, and lie in that area, covering your head with your hands.  ■        Your        choice        should        be        driven        by        your        specific        circumstances        
Flash Flood Safety Rules
■        Avoid        driving,        walking,        or        swimming        in        flood        waters.■        Stay        away        from        
high        water,        storm        drains, ditches, ravines, or culverts.  Even moving water only six inches deep can knock you off your feet.  Move        to        higher        ground.■        Do        not        let        children        play        near        storm        drains.■        If        you        come        upon        a        flooded        roadway        never drive through it.  
TURN AROUND DON’T DROWN!!!
For more information on flood safety, please visit: www.floodsafety.noaa.gov
12USGS/Don        BeckerBrian        PetersOccasionally tornadoes develop so rapidly that advance warning is not possible.  Remain alert for signs of an approaching tornado such as a dark, often greenish sky, large hail, or a loud roar similar to a freight train. ...Nature’s Most Violent StormsThunderstorms, Tornadoes, Lightning...
Tornado Safety in Schools
Every        School        Should        Have        a        Plan  ■        Develop        a        severe        weather        safety        plan        that        ensures        everyone        will        take        cover        within        60        seconds.                Conduct        frequent        tornado        drills.                Include         provisions for all after-hours, school-related activities.■        Every        school        should        be        inspected        and        tornado        shelter        areas        designated         by a registered engineer or architect.  Rooms with exterior walls should never be used as tornado shelters. ■        Basements        offer        the        best        protection.                 Schools        without        basements        should        use        interior        rooms        and        hallways        on        the        lowest        floor,        away        from         windows.  ■        Delay        lunches        or        assemblies        in        large        rooms        if        severe        weather        is        anticipated.                 Rooms        with        large        roof        spans        (e.g.,        gymnasiums,        cafeterias,        and        auditoriums)        offer        little        or        no        protection        from         tornado-strength winds.■        Ensure        students        and        staff        know        the        protective        position        (shown        below).                  Everyone should sit facing an interior wall, elbows to knees, and with hands over the back of their heads.■        Each        school        should        have        a        NOAA        Weather        
Radio
        with        battery        back- up.  Remember, the NWS issues a Tornado Watch when conditions are favorable for tornado development and a Tornado Warning when a tornado has been spotted or indicated by radar.   ■        If        the        school’s        alarm        system        relies        on        electricity,        have        an        alternative         method to notify teachers and students in case of power failure.■        Make        special        provisions        for        faculty        and        students        with        disabilities,        those        in        portable        classrooms,        and        those        outdoors.                They        should        be        notified        first        of        approaching        severe        weather.                        ■        Keep        children        at        school        beyond        regular        hours        during        a        Tornado        Warning.                  School bus drivers should identify protective areas along each part of their route where they and their passengers can take cover if overtaken by a tornado or high winds.■        Include        properly        designed        tornado         shelters when planning additions or  new school buildings.
Hospitals, nursing homes, and other institutions should develop similar severe weather safety plans.
= “BEST AVAILABLE” Tornado ShelterMeadowlawn Elementary
N
13American        Red        CrossA PREPAREDNESS GUIDEIncluding Tornado Safety  Information for Schools
Stay Informed with NOAA Weather Radio All Hazards
The NWS continuously broadcasts warnings, watches, forecasts and other non-weather        related        hazard        information        on        NOAA        Weather        Radio        All        Hazards        (NWR).                The        average        range        of        the        1000+        NWR        transmitters        in        the        United        States        is        40        miles,        depending        on        topography.                For        the        best        performing        NWR        receivers,        NWS        suggests        that        you        look        at        devices        that        have        been        certified        to        Public        Alert™        standards.                These        radios        meet        certain        technical        standards        and        come        with        many        features        such        as:                Specific        Area        Message        Encoding        (SAME),         a battery back-up, both audio and visual alarms, selective programming for the types of hazards you want to be warned for, and the ability to activate external alarm devices for people with disabilities.  Like a smoke detector, an NWR can wake you in the middle of the night to alert you to a dangerous situation.When conditions are favorable for severe weather to develop, a Severe Thunderstorm or Tornado Watch is typically issued.  NWS meteorologists then use information from weather radar, Skywarn® spotters and other sources to issue Severe Thunderstorm and Tornado Warnings for areas where severe weather is imminent.  Severe Thunderstorm and Tornado Warnings are disseminated through a variety of means, such        as        local        radio        and        television        station        broadcasts,        the        Internet,        and        other        communication        services        provided        by        America’s        Weather        Industry.                  Warnings are also broadcast in the impacted area on NWR.  Local emergency management        and        other        public        safety        officials        are        notified        because        they        lead         your community’s response to the hazard.    Working        with        
o
ur        nation’s        Emergency        Alert        System        (EAS),        NWR        is        truly        an        “all        hazards”        radio        network,        making        it        a        great        source        for        comprehensive        weather        and        emergency        information.                Please        visit        www.weather.gov/nwr  for more information.
What to Listen for...
To r n a d o  WaTc h—NWS meteorologists have determined that tornadoes are possible in your area.  Remain alert for approaching storms.  Know if your location        is        in        the        watch        area        by        listening        to        NOAA        Weather        Radio,        visiting         www.weather.gov or by tuning into your favorite radio or television weather information broadcast stations.
Se v e r e  Th u n d e rS To r m  WaTc h—NWS meteorologists have determined that severe thunderstorms are likely to occur in your area.  Watch the sky and stay tuned for NWS warnings.
To r n a d o  Wa r n i n g —NWS meteorologists have determined that a tornado is occurring,        or        likely        to        occur        within        minutes,        in        the        specified        area.                Warnings         indicate imminent danger to life and property.   
Se v e r e  Th u n d e rS To r m  W a r n i n g —NWS meteorologists have determined that a severe thunderstorm is occurring or likely to occur.  Warnings indicate imminent danger to life and property.The        NWS,        FEMA        and        the        American        Red        Cross        work        to        inform        community        officials        and        the        public        about        the        dangers        posed        by        tornadoes        and        severe        thunderstorms.                You        can        prepare        for        the        possibility        of        tornadoes        or        severe         thunderstorms by learning the safest places to seek shelter when at home, work, school, or outdoors.  Learn how to monitor and prepare for severe weather so that YOU can make better decisions when needed most!
14nWS o uTl o o k  = g eT re a d y    nWS W
aTc h = g eT SeT
nWS W a r n i n g  = SToP Wh aT 
y o u a r e d o i n g  a n d Ta k e a cTi o n !
Severe thunderstorm outlooks are created by the Storm Prediction Center:  
www.spc.ncep.noaa.gov/products/outlook/
For the latest hazardous weather outlooks, please visit your local NWS Weather Forecast Office web site.  .  ...Nature’s Most Violent StormsThunderstorms, Tornadoes, Lightning...
MAKE a PLAN
Everyone needs to prepare for the hazards that could affect their area.   FEMA,        the        American        Red        Cross        and        the        NWS        urge        every        household        to         develop an emergency plan.Where will your family and friends be when disaster strikes? They could be anywhere—at        work,        at        school,        or        in        the        car.                How        will        you        find        each        other?                 Will        you        know        if        your        children        are        safe?        Disaster        may        force        you        to        evacuate         your neighborhood or keep you in your home.  What would you do if basic services such as water, gas, electricity, or telephones were cut off?
Develop an Emergency Plan: 
Know        Your        Risk
         Gather        information        about        hazards.                 Contact        your        local        emergency        management        office,        American        Red        Cross        chapter        and        National        Weather        Service        office.                Find        out        what        types        of        disaster        could        occur        and        how         best to respond and protect yourself.  Learn your community’s warning signals        and        evacuation        plans.                FEMA        has        information        about        how        to         prepare for different hazards at:  www.fema.gov/plan/index.shtm
Have        a        Plan  Discuss        the        information        you        have        gathered        and        what        you        need        to        do        to        prepare        for        and        respond        to        different        emergencies.                Pick        two        places        to meet in case you are separated:          ■         A        spot        outside        your        home        for        an        emergency,        such        as        fire,                 ■         A        location        away        from        your        neighborhood        in        case        you        can’t           return home.          Choose        an        out-of-area        emergency        contact        person        as        your        “family                         check-in        contact”        for        everyone        to        call        if        you        get        separated.                Discuss                        what you would do if advised to evacuate.  No matter where you are located,        FEMA        can        help        you        create        an        effective        emergency        plan        at:                  www.ready.gov/america/makeaplan/index.html
Be        Prepared
■                Post        emergency        telephone        numbers        by        phones        and        in        cell        phones.        ■                Install        safety        features        in        your        house,        such        as        smoke        alarms        and        fire                  extinguishers. ■                Inspect        your        home        for        potential        hazards        (such        as        items        that        can                                  move,        fall,        break,        or        catch        fire)        and        correct        them.        ■                Have        your        family        learn        basic        safety        measures,        such        as        CPR        and                                 first        aid;        how        to        use        a        fire        extinguisher;        and        how        and        when        to        turn                 off water, gas, and electricity in your home. ■                Teach        children        how        and        when        to        call        911        or        your        local        emergency                         medical services number.
Before the Storm...
Know your risk,Have a plan,Be preparedandPractice and maintain your plan!
15A PREPAREDNESS GUIDEIncluding Tornado Safety  Information for Schools
■                Keep        enough        supplies        in        your        home        to        meet        your        needs        for        at           least 3 days.  Assemble an emergency supply kit with items    you may need if evacuated.  Store these supplies in sturdy, easy-           to-carry        containers,        such        as        backpacks        or        duffle        bags.                        Keep                                  important family documents in a waterproof container.  Keep a    smaller  emergency supply kit in your vehicle.
EMERGENCY SUPPLY KIT
Assemble        the        following        items        to        create        kits        for        use        at        home,        the        office,        at         school and in your vehicle:         ■         Water—1        gallon        per        person,        per        day        (3-day        supply        for        evacuation                                 and        2        week        supply        for        home)                 ■         Food—a        3-day        supply        of        non-perishable        food        for        evacuation,                                  2-week        supply        for        home                 ■         Battery-powered        or        hand        crank        radio,        and        a        “Public        Alert        Certified”                         NOAA        Weather        Radio        and        extra        batteries        for        both         ■         Items        for        infants—including        formula,        diapers,        bottles,        pacifiers,                                  powdered        milk        and        medications        not        
requiring        refrigeration         ■         Items        for        seniors,        people        with        disabilities        and        anyone        with        medical                 needs—including special foods, denture items, extra eyeglasses,    hearing aid batteries, prescription and non-prescription medications           that        are        regularly        used,        inhalers        and        other        essential        equipment                 ■         Kitchen        accessories—a        manual        can        opener,        mess        kits        or        disposable                 cups, plates and utensils, utility knife, sugar and salt, aluminum foil   and plastic wrap, resealable plastic bags          ■         One        complete        change        of        clothing        and        footwear        for        each        person—                 including sturdy work shoes or boots, raingear and other items            adjusted        for        the        season,        such        as        hats        and        gloves,        thermal                          underwear, sunglasses, dust masks          ■         Sanitation        and        hygiene        items—shampoo,        deodorant,           toothpaste, toothbrushes, comb and brush, lip   balm, sunscreen, contact lenses and supplies and   any medications regularly used, toilet paper,           towelettes,        soap,        hand        sanitizer,        liquid        detergent,                   feminine        supplies,        plastic        garbage        bags        (heavy-duty)                   and        ties        (for        personal        sanitation),        medium-sized           plastic bucket with tight lid, disinfectant, household   chlorine bleach          ■         Other        essential        items—paper,        pencil,        needles,                          thread, medicine dropper, whistle, emergency    preparedness manual          ■         Several        flashlights        and        extra,        fresh        batteries                 ■         A        
first-aid        kit        16
American        Red        Cross/FEMA
FEMA/Win        Henderson
FEMA/David        Fine
For a national overview of hazards please visit:  www.noaawatch.gov...Nature’s Most Violent StormsThunderstorms, Tornadoes, Lightning...
         ■         Blankets        or        a        sleeping        bag        for        each        person                 ■         Entertainment—including        games        and        books,        favorite        dolls        and           stuffed animals for small children          ■         A        map        of        the        area        marked        with        places        you        could        go        and        their           telephone numbers          ■         An        extra        set        of        keys—including        keys        for        vehicles        and        any           properties owned         ■         Copies        of        important        documents—including        insurance        information,                   driver’s        licenses,        passports        and        work        identification        badges                 ■         Copies        of        medical        prescriptions                 ■         Cash,        coins        and        copies        of        credit        cards                         ■         Family        and        emergency        contact        information         ■         Matches        in        a        waterproof        container                 ■         Cell        phone        with        chargers         ■         Family        and        emergency        contact        information         ■         Pet        supplies—consider        preparing        an        emergency        supply        kit           for your pets including:  • Food—keep at least 3 days of food in an airtight, waterproof container.• Water—store        at        least        3        days        of        water        specifically        for
         your pets in addition to water you need for yourself and your family.• Medicines and medical records—keep an extra supply of medicines your pet takes on a regular basis in a waterproof container.• First aid kit—talk to your veterinarian about what is most appropriate for your pet’s emergency medical needs.                Most        kits        should        include        colton        bandage        rolls,        bandage        tape        and        scissors;        antibiotic        ointment;        flea         and tick prevention; latex gloves, isopropyl alcohol and saline        solution.        Include        a        pet        first        aid        reference        book.• Collar with ID tag, harness or leash— your pet should wear        a        collar        with        its        rabies        tag        and        identification        at        all        times.                Include        a        backup        leash,        collar        and        ID        tag        in        your        pet’s        emergency        supply        kit.                In        addition,        place        copies         of your pet’s registration information, adoption papers, vaccination documents and medical records in a clean plastic bag or waterproof container and also add them to        your        kit.                You        should        also        consider        talking        with        your        
17A PREPAREDNESS GUIDEIncluding Tornado Safety  Information for Schools
veterinarian        about        permanent        identification        such        as         microchipping and enrolling your pet in a recovery database.Crate or other pet carrier—• if you need to evacuate in an emergency situation take your pets and animals with you        provided        that        it        is        practical        to        do        so.                In        many        cases,         your ability to do so will be aided by having a sturdy, safe, comfortable crate or carrier ready for transporting your pet.  The carrier should be large enough for your pet to stand, turn around and lie down.Sanitation—• include pet litter and litter box if appropriate, newspapers, paper towels, plastic trash bags and household chlorine bleach to provide for your        pet’s        sanitation        needs.                You        can        use                bleach        as        a        disinfectant        (dilute        nine        parts        water        to        one        part        bleach),        or in an emergency you can also use it to purify water.   Use        16        drops        of        regular        household        liquid        bleach        per        gallon        of        water.                Do        not        use        scented        or        color        safe         bleaches, or those with added cleaners.A picture of you and your pet together—• if you become separated from your pet during an emergency, a picture of you and your pet together will help you document ownership and allow others to assist you in identifying        your        pet.                Include        detailed        information        about         species, breed, age, sex, color and  distinguishing characteristics.Familiar items—• include favorite toys, treats or bedding For more information on preparing your pets please visit:    www.ready.gov/america/getakit/pets.html
Practice        and        Maintain        Your        Plan
         Ask        questions        to        make        sure        everyone        remembers        meeting        places,        phone        numbers,        and        safety        rules.                Conduct        drills        regularly.                Test        your        smoke        detectors        and        NOAA        Weather        Radio        monthly        and        change        
the        batteries        at        least        once        each        year.                Test        and        recharge        your        fire        extinguisher(s)         according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Replace stored water and food        every        6        months.                
For More Information
 Safety and preparedness materials can be viewed and downloaded at: National Weather Service at:  www.weather.gov/safety.php          Federal        Emergency        Management        Agency        at:                www.ready.gov         American        Red        Cross        at:                www.redcross.org  
18FEMA
NOAA/PA        201051


Often when we start a hike, the weather is agreeable, or at least not life threatening. These conditions can rapidly change when we hike to higher elevations or when cold fronts come through. I am reminded of a recent day hike in Georgia near Springer Mountain. The previous week had been on and off below freezing and there were still small patches of ice on the roads. I didn’t think much about it as the forest floor appeared free of snow and the air temperature was in the lower 50’s. About a mile into my hike, on the north side of a ridgeline, the trail was suddenly a solid sheet of ice. Not only was there ice, but the trail was also punctuated with rocks just waiting to crack my skull if I should slip. Both the lack of direct sun and the compaction of snow by previous hikers resulted in a 3 inch thick glaze. Luckily, I had packed my micro spikes. After a brief wet stop to put them on, I once again had good footing and a successful hike. These ice-covered trail segments can persist for weeks… long after we think the weather should not support them. When going on a hike where conditions may support ice and snow, it is best to consider the 5 “F”s, forecast, foot-wear, friends, fitness, and flashlight. Forecast: Before leaving on a journey, you should always check the weather… it is a basic tenant of wilderness hiking. Know what you are getting into and be prepared. On the other hand, once you have been on the trail for several days you may not have access to weather reports. Remember, for every 1,000 feet of elevation gain the ambient temperature decreases by 3 degrees. Everyone wants to carry a light pack, excess gear “just in case,” is not a popular consideration. We strongly recommend you err on the side of caution when hiking at altitude or when seasonal weather can go south. Remember: If something happens and you fall, (assuming someone knows you are injured) you can expect 4-6 hours of laying on ice before a rescue team may reach you.
Foot-wear: Normal tread on boots and trail runners are next to useless on ice and snow. You need to carry and use micro-spikes! The brand is much less important than using them. In addition to proper foot-wear for traction if your feet (toes first) are wet and become cold take the time to change socks and warm up. Trench foot and frostbite are sure ways to spoil a hike. Frostbite on the foot One last item you should include is calf high gaiters that will keep snow out of your foot-wear. Regardless of what you carry in your pack, your feet are your foundation while hiking. Although there is carryover, this pamphlet is not intended to address prevention or care of hypothermia, chilblains, trench foot or frostbite. For more information go to our website: www.ALDHA.Org/HASTE. Friends: When there is the potential for frozen conditions, we strongly recommend you not hike alone. A trail buddy can help keep you oriented. Two pair of eyes will increase the probability of staying on trail. Someone is there to help provide shelter and first aid if there is an injury. Finally, frequent buddy checks are critical when trekking through extreme environments. You my not notice early signs of frostbite on yourself that could be easily recognized by a friend. Fitness: Your physical condition is a significant factor in successfully negotiating a snow and ice covered trail. Fitness not only includes being in shape, but it also includes being hydrated and well fed. Traveling through snow or on ice takes much more energy than on normal trail. When you are fatigued, dehydrated, or starting to become hypothermic, your balance and coordination become diminished, and you are more apt to slip and fall.
Flashlight: One of the most common omissions during winter and early spring hikes is remembering to carry two, that is right, two light sources. Between December 21st (the shortest day of the year) and early spring you are at the greatest risk for freezing temperatures on the Appalachian Trail. The 10-15 miles you thought could be done now requires hiking in the dark. Without light, the risk of falls and injury go up exponentially. Remember to keep your light source near the body as cold temperatures shorten battery life






First Aid/CPR/AED
 PARTICIPANT’S MANUAL  About This Manual  vii   Health Precautions and Guidelines During Training 
 viii
 CHAPTER  1 Before Giving Care and Checking an Injured or Ill Person 1
  Your Role in the EMS System  2   Disease Transmission and Prevention 
 5   Taking Action: Emergency Action Steps 
 8   Checking a Conscious Person 
 14   Shock 
 16   Checking an Unconscious Person 
 1 7   Incident Stress 
 22   Putting It All Together 
 23  
SKILL SHEET:  Removing Gloves  24  
SKILL SHEET:  Checking an Injured or Ill Adult  25  
SKILL SHEET:  Checking an Injured or Ill Child or Infant  27
 CHAPTER  2  Cardiac Emergencies and CPR _____________________________ 29
  Background  30   Heart Attack 
 30   Cardiac Arrest 
 33   Putting It All Together 
 40  
SKILL SHEET:  CPR—Adult  41
 SKILL SHEET:  CPR—Child  42  
SKILL SHEET:  CPR—Infant  43
 CHAPTER  3  AED ____________________________________________________________  44
  When the Heart Suddenly Fails  45   Using an AED 
 45   AED Precautions 
 45   How to Use an AED—Adults 
 46   How to Use an AED—Children and Infants 
 47   Special AED Situations 
 47   Other AED Protocols 
 49   AED Maintenance 
 49   Putting It All Together 
 49  
SKILL SHEET:   AED—Adult or Child Older Than 8 Years or Weighing More than 55 Pounds  50  
SKILL SHEET:   AED—Child and Infant Younger Than 8 Years or Weighing Less than 55 Pounds  52Table of Contents
iv  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Table of Contents    v CHAPTER  4 Breathing Emergencies   54
  Background  55   Respiratory Distress and Respiratory Arrest 
 56   Choking 
 59   Putting It All Together 
 65
 SKILL SHEET:  Conscious Choking—Adult  66
 SKILL SHEET:  Conscious Choking—Child  67
 SKILL SHEET:  Conscious Choking—Infant  68
 SKILL SHEET:  Unconscious Choking—Adult  69
 SKILL SHEET:  Unconscious Choking—Child and Infant  70
 CHAPTER  5  Sudden Illness  71
  Sudden Illness  72   Speciﬁ c Sudden Illnesses 
 73   Poisoning 
 79   Putting It All Together 
 83
 CHAPTER  6  Environmental Emergencies  84
  Heat-Related Illnesses and Cold-Related Emergencies  85   Bites and Stings 
 88   Poisonous Plants 
 98   Lightning 
 99   Putting It All Together 
 100
 CHAPTER  7  Soft Tissue Injuries  101
  Wounds  102   Burns 
 109   Special Situations 
 112   Putting It All Together 
 116
 SKILL SHEET:  Controlling External Bleeding  11 7
 SKILL SHEET:  Using a Manufactured Tourniquet  118
 CHAPTER  8  Injuries to Muscles, Bones and Joints  119
  Background  120   Types of Injuries 
 121   Putting It All Together 
 129
 SKILL SHEET: Applying an Anatomic Splint  130
 SKILL SHEET: Applying a Soft Splint  132
 SKILL SHEET: Applying a Rigid Splint  134
 SKILL SHEET:  Applying a Sling and Binder  136 CHAPTER  9  Special Situations and Circumstances _____________________138
  Children and Infants  139   Emergency Childbirth 
 145   Older Adults 
 146   People With Disabilities 
 147   Language Barriers 
 149   Crime Scenes and Hostile Situations 
 149   Putting It All Together 
 150
 CHAPTER  10 Asthma _______________________________________________________ 151
  Asthma  152   Putting It All Together 
 154  
SKILL SHEET:  Assisting With an Asthma Inhaler  155
 CHAPTER  11  Anaphylaxis and Epinephrine Auto-Injectors  157
  Anaphylaxis  158   Putting It All Together 
 160
 SKILL SHEET:  Assisting with an Epinephrine Auto-Injector  161
 APPENDIX   Injury Prevention and Emergency Preparedness  163
  Injuries  164   Putting It All Together 
 1 71
  Sources  1 72   Index 
 1 75
vi  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manual84  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s ManualCHAPTER   6
Environmental Emergencies
Disease, illness and injury are not the only causes of medical emergencies. Much of our environment appears to be relatively harmless. A weekend outing can bring you closer to the joys of nature: animals, mountains, rivers, blue skies. But it also can expose you to disease-carrying insects, other biting or stinging creatures and rapid changes in the weather. Whereas many environmental emergencies can be avoided, even with the best prevention efforts, emergencies do occur. In this chapter you will discover how to prevent heat-related illnesses and cold-related emergencies, as well as bites and stings from insects, spiders and other animals. You also will ﬁ  nd information on how to avoid contact with poisonous plants and how to avoid being struck by lightning. In addition, you will read about when to call for help and how to give care until help arrives.
  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies 85HEAT-RELATED ILLNESSES AND COLD-RELATED  EMERGENCIES
Exposure to extreme heat or cold can make a person seriously ill. The likelihood of illness also depends on factors such as physical activity, clothing, wind, humidity, working and living conditions, and a person’s age and state of mind (Fig. 6-1).Once the signals of a heat-related illness or cold-related emergency begin to appear, a person’s condition can quickly worsen. A heat-related illness or cold-related emergency can result in death. If you see any of the signals, act quickly.People at risk for heat-related illness or a cold-related emergency include those who work or exercise outdoors, elderly people, young children and people with health problems. Also at risk are those who have had a heat-related illness or cold-related emergency in the past, those with medical conditions that cause poor blood circulation and those who take medications to eliminate water from the body (diuretics).People usually try to get out of extreme heat or cold before they begin to feel ill. However, some people do not or cannot. Athletes and those who work outdoors often keep working even after they begin to feel ill. People living in buildings with poor ventilation, poor insulation or poor heating or cooling systems are at increased risk of heat-related illnesses or cold-related emergencies. Often they might not even recognize that they are in danger of becoming ill.
Heat-Related Illness
Heat cramps, heat exhaustion and heat stroke are conditions caused by overexposure to heat, loss of ﬂ uids and electrolytes.
Heat Cramps
Heat cramps are the least severe of the heat-related illnesses. They often are the ﬁ rst signals that the body is having trouble with the heat. What to Look For
Heat cramps are painful muscle spasms. They usually occur in the legs and abdomen. Think of them as a warning of a possible heat-related illness.
What to Do
To care for heat cramps, help the person move to a cool place to rest. Give an electrolyte- and carbohydrate-containing ﬂ uid such as a commercial sports drink, fruit juice or milk. Water also may be given. Lightly stretch the muscle and gently massage the area (Fig. 6-2). The person should not take salt tablets. They can worsen the situation.When cramps stop, the person usually can start activity again if there are no other signals of illness. He or she should keep drinking plenty of ﬂ uids. Watch the person carefully for further signals of heat-related illness.
FIGURE 6-1  Exposure to extreme heat or cold can make a person seriously ill.FIGURE 6-2  Lightly stretching the muscle and gently massaging the area, along with having the person rest and giving electrolyte- and carbohydrate-containing ﬂ uids, usually is enough for the body to recover from heat cramps.
9˚-9˚
32˚86  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s ManualHeat Exhaustion
Heat exhaustion is a more severe condition than heat cramps. It often affects athletes, ﬁ reﬁ ghters, construction workers and factory workers. It also affects those who wear heavy clothing in a hot, humid environment. 
What to Look For
Signals of heat exhaustion include cool, moist, pale, ashen or ﬂ ushed skin; headache; nausea; dizziness; weakness; and exhaustion.
What to Do 
When a heat-related illness is recognized in its early stages, it usually can be reversed. Get the person out of the heat. Move the person to a cooler environment with circulating air. Loosen or remove as much clothing as possible and apply cool, wet cloths, such as towels or sheets, taking care to remoisten the cloths periodically (Fig. 6-3). Spraying the person with water and fanning also can help. If the person is conscious and able to swallow, give him or her small amounts of a cool ﬂ uid such as a commercial sports drink or fruit juice to restore ﬂ uids and electrolytes. Milk or water also may be given. Do not let the conscious person drink too quickly. Give about 4 ounces of ﬂ uid every 15 minutes. Let the person rest in a comfortable position and watch carefully for changes in his or her condition. The person should not resume normal activities the same day.If the person’s condition does not improve or he or she refuses ﬂ uids, has a change in consciousness or vomits, call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number, as these are indications that the person’s condition is getting worse. Stop giving ﬂ uids and place the person on his or her side to keep the airway open. Watch for signals of breathing problems. Keep the person lying down and continue to cool the body any way you can (see What to Do Until Help Arrives).Heat Stroke
Heat stroke is the least common but most severe heat-related illness. It usually occurs when people ignore the signals of heat exhaustion. Heat stroke develops when the body systems are overwhelmed by heat and begin to stop functioning. Heat stroke is a serious medical emergency. 
What to Look For
Signals of heat stroke include extremely high body temperature, red skin that can be either dry or moist; changes in consciousness; rapid, weak pulse; rapid, shallow breathing; confusion; vomiting; and seizures.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number immediately. Heat stroke is a life-threatening emergency.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
Preferred method: Rapidly cool the body by  ■
immersing the person up to the neck in cold water, if possible. ORDouse or spray the person with cold water.Sponge the person with ice water-doused towels 
 ■
over the entire body, frequently rotating the cold,  wet towels.Cover with bags of ice.
 ■
If you are not able to measure and monitor the  ■
person’s temperature, apply rapid cooling methods for 20 minutes or until the person’s condition improves.Give care according for other conditions found. 
 ■
Cold-Related Emergencies
Frostbite and hypothermia are two types of cold-related emergencies.
Frostbite
Frostbite is the freezing of body parts exposed to the cold. Severity depends on the air temperature, length of exposure and the wind. Frostbite can result in the loss of ﬁ ngers, hands, arms, toes, feet and legs.
What to Look For
The signals of frostbite include lack of feeling in the affected area, swelling and skin that appears waxy, is cold to the touch or is discolored (ﬂ ushed, white, yellow or blue). In more serious cases, blisters may form and the affected part may turn black and show signs of deep tissue damage.
FIGURE 6-3  When you recognize a heat-related illness, get the person out of the heat, loosen or remove clothing and apply cool, wet cloths, such as towels or sheets. Spraying the person with water and fanning also can be effective.
  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies 87When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number for more serious frostbite or seek emergency medical help as soon as possible. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives
To care for frostbite, handle the area gently. Remove wet clothing and jewelry, if possible, from the affected area. Never rub a frostbitten area. Rubbing causes further damage to soft tissues. Do not attempt to rewarm the frostbitten area if there is a chance that it might refreeze or if you are close to a medical facility. For minor frostbite, rapidly rewarm the affected part using skin-to-skin contact such as with a warm hand. To care for a more serious injury, gently soak it in water not warmer than about 105° F (Fig. 6-4, A). If you do not have a thermometer, test the water temperature yourself. If the temperature is uncomfortable to your touch, it is too warm. Keep the frostbitten part in the water until normal color returns and it feels warm (20 to 30 minutes). Loosely bandage the area with a dry, sterile dressing (Fig. 6-4, B). If ﬁ ngers or toes are frostbitten, place cotton or gauze between them. Do not break any blisters. Take precautions to prevent hypothermia. Monitor the person’s condition, and if you see that the person is going into shock, give care accordingly. Do not give ibuprofen or other nonsteroidal anti-inﬂ ammatory drugs (NSAIDs) when caring for frostbite. 
Hypothermia
In a hypothermic condition, the entire body cools because its ability to keep warm is failing. The person will die if not given the proper care. The air temperature does not have to be below freezing for people to develop hypothermia. This is especially true if the person is wet or if it is windy. Elderly people in poorly heated homes can develop hypothermia. The homeless, the ill and young children also are at risk. Certain conditions can more easily lead to hypothermia, including:Ingestion of substances that interfere with the body’s  ■
ability to regulate temperature (such as alcohol, other drugs and certain medications).Any medical condition that impairs circulation, such 
 ■
as diabetes or cardiovascular disease.Prolonged exposure to cold, wet and/or windy 
 ■
conditions or wet clothing. 
What to Look For
Signals of hypothermia include the following:Shivering
 ■
Numbness ■
Glassy stare ■
Indifference ■
Loss of consciousness ■
Shivering that stops without rewarming is a sign that the person’s condition is worsening. He or she needs immediate medical care.
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number immediately for any case of hypothermia. 
FIGURE 6-4, A–B  To care for more serious frostbite: A, Warm the area gently by soaking the affected part in water not warmer than 105˚ F. Keep the frostbitten part in the water until normal color returns and it feels warm (20–30 minutes). 
B, Loosely bandage the area with a dry, sterile dressing.
100 - 105 °F
AB88  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s ManualWhat to Do Until Help Arrives
To care for hypothermia, start by caring for life-threatening conditions (see below). Make the person comfortable. Gently move the person to a warm place. Remove wet clothing and dry the person. Put on dry clothing. Warm the body gradually by wrapping the person in blankets and plastic sheeting to hold in body heat (Fig. 6-5). Also, keep the head covered to further retain body heat. If you are far from medical care, position the person near a heat source or apply heat pads or other heat sources to the body, such as containers ﬁ lled with warm water. Carefully monitor any heat source to avoid burning the person. Keep a barrier, such as a blanket, towel or clothing, between the heat source and the person. If the person is alert, give warm liquids that do not contain alcohol or caffeine. Alcohol can cause heat loss and caffeine can cause dehydration. Do not warm the person too quickly, such as by immersing the person in warm water. Check breathing and monitor for any changes in the person’s condition and care for shock.In cases of severe hypothermia, the person may be unconscious. Breathing may have slowed or stopped. The body may feel stiff because the muscles became rigid. Check for breathing for no more than 10 seconds. If the person is not breathing, perform CPR. Continue to warm the person until emergency medical services (EMS) personnel take over. Be prepared to use an automated external deﬁ brillator (AED), if available.Preventing Heat-Related Illnesses and Cold-Related Emergencies
In general, you can prevent illnesses caused by overexposure to extreme temperatures. To prevent heat-related illnesses and cold-related emergencies, follow these guidelines: Do not go outdoors during the hottest or coldest 
 ■
part of the day.Change your activity level according to the temperature.
 ■
Take frequent breaks. ■
Dress appropriately for the environment. ■
Drink large amounts of ﬂ uids. ■
BITES AND STINGS
People are bitten and stung every day by insects, spiders, snakes, animals and marine life. Most of the time, these bites and stings do not cause serious problems. However, in rare circumstances, certain bites and stings can cause serious illness or even death in people who are sensitive to the venom. 
Insect Stings
Most of the time, insect stings are harmless. If the person is allergic, an insect sting can lead to anaphylaxis, a life-threatening condition. 
What to Look For
Signals of an insect sting include:Presence of a stinger.
 ■
Pain. ■
Swelling. ■
Signals of an allergic reaction. ■
What to Do
If someone is stung by an insect:Remove any visible stinger. Scrape it away from the skin 
 ■
with a clean ﬁ ngernail or a plastic card, such as a credit card, or use tweezers (Fig. 6-6). In the case of a bee sting, if you use tweezers, grasp the stinger, not the venom sac. Wash the site with soap and water. 
 ■
Cover the site and keep it clean. ■
Apply a cold pack to the area to reduce pain and swelling.  ■
Call 9-1-1 if the person has any trouble breathing  ■
or for any other signals of anaphylaxis.
Tick-Borne Diseases
Humans can get very sick from the bite of an infected tick. Some of the diseases spread by ticks include Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Babesia infection, ehrlichiosis and Lyme disease.
 FIGURE 6-5  For hypothermia, warm the body gradually by wrapping the person in blankets or putting on dry clothing and moving him or her to a warm place. Courtesy of Canadian Red Cross.  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies 89Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
Rocky Mountain spotted fever is a bacterial infection spread by wood ticks in the western United States, dog ticks in the eastern United States, and other ticks in the southern United States. Rocky Mountain spotted fever occurs mostly in the spring and summer, and most cases occur in children. 
What to Look For
Signals of Rocky Mountain spotted fever usually appear between 2 and 14 days after a tick bite. Initial signals of Rocky Mountain spotted fever include the following:Fever
 ■
Nausea ■
FIGURE 6-6  If someone is stung by an insect, scrape the stinger away from the skin with a clean ﬁ ngernail or a plastic card, such as a credit card. FOCUS ON PREVENTION
LAYER YOUR WAY TO WARMTH
As long as seasonal changes and cold climates exist, preventing cold-related emergencies, such as hypothermia, remains important when we work or play outside.The best way to ensure your comfort and warmth outdoors is to layer your clothing. The ﬁ rst layer, called the base layer, is next to your skin. The base layer helps to regulate your body temperature by moving perspiration away from your skin. This is important because if perspiration gets trapped inside your clothes, you can become chilled rapidly, which can lead to hypothermia.Thermal underwear makes a good base layer for cold weather. The fabrics that are best at moving sweat away from the skin (also called wicking) are silk, merino wool and certain synthetics. Cotton is not a good choice because it traps moisture rather than wicking it away.The job of the middle layer is insulation. This layer keeps you warm; it helps you retain heat by trapping air close to your body. Natural ﬁ bers, such as wool and goose down, are excellent insulators. So is synthetic ﬂ eece. Vests, jackets and tights are examples of clothing that can be worn for insulation.The shell or outer layer protects you from wind, rain or snow. For cold weather, the shell layer should be both waterproof and “breathable.” This will keep wind and water from getting inside of the other two layers while allowing perspiration to evaporate. The shell also should be roomy enough to ﬁ t easily over the other layers without restricting your movement.One of the other advantages of layering is that you can make quick adjustments if the weather changes or you change your activity level. You can take clothes off when you become too warm and put them back on if you get cold.In addition to layering your clothes, to stay warm in cold weather you also should wear:
A hat.  ■
A scarf or knit mask that covers your face  ■
and mouth.Sleeves that are snug at the wrist.
 ■
Mittens (they are warmer than gloves).  ■
Water-resistant boots.  ■90  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s ManualVomiting ■
Muscle aches or pain ■
Lack of appetite ■
Severe headache ■
Later signals include:Rash: The 
 ■ spotted rash usually starts a few days after fever develops. It ﬁ rst appears as small spots on the wrists and ankles. It then spreads to the rest of the body. However, about one-third of persons infected with the illness do not get a rash.Abdominal pain.
 ■
Joint pain. ■
Diarrhea. ■
When to Seek Medical Care
Call a health care provider if the person develops signals of Rocky Mountain spotted fever after a tick bite. The health care provider is likely to prescribe antibiotics. In most cases, the person will recover fully. If left untreated, complications of Rocky Mountain spotted fever can be life threatening. 
Babesia Infection
Babesia also called Babesiosis is a protozoa infection spread by deer ticks and black-legged ticks. It is more common during warm months, and most cases happen in the northeast and upper Midwest regions of the United States.
What to Look For
Many people infected with Babesia have no apparent symptoms. Some people may have ﬂ u-like symptoms, such as: Fever
 ■
Sweats ■
Chills ■
Body aches and headaches ■
No appetite ■
Nausea ■
Fatigue ■
Others infected with Babesia develop a type of anemia that can cause jaundice and dark urine. In some people, the disease can be life threatening if untreated. The elderly and persons with no spleen, a weak immune system or a serious health condition are the most susceptible.
When to Seek Medical Care
If a person develops any of the signals described above, he or she should seek medical care. Most people with signals of the disease can be treated successfully with prescription medications.Ehrlichiosis
Most cases of infection with the bacteria ehrlichia in humans are caused by bites by an infected Lone Star tick, and occur mainly in the southern, eastern and south-central United States. 
What to Look For 
Many people with ehrlichiosis do not become ill. Some develop only mild signals that are seen 5 to 10 days after an infected tick bit the person. Initial signals include the following:Fever
 ■
Headache ■
Fatigue ■
Muscle aches ■
Other signals that may develop include the following:Nausea
 ■
Vomiting ■
Diarrhea ■
Cough ■
Joint pains ■
Confusion ■
Rash (in some cases) ■
When to Seek Medical Care
If the person becomes ill with any of the above signals described, he or she should seek medical care. Ehrlichiosis is treated with antibiotics. 
Lyme Disease
Lyme disease is spreading throughout the United States. Although it is most prevalent on the east coast and the upper Midwest, cases of Lyme disease have been reported in all 50 states. Lyme disease is spread by the deer tick and black-legged tick, which attaches itself to ﬁ eld mice and deer. Deer ticks are tiny and difﬁ cult to see (Fig. 6-7). They are much smaller than the common dog tick or wood tick. They can be as small as a poppy seed or the head of a pin. Adult deer ticks are only as large as a grape seed. Because of the tick’s tiny size, its bite usually is painless. Many people who develop Lyme disease cannot recall having been bitten.The tick is found around branches and in wooded and grassy areas. Like all ticks, it attaches itself to any warm-blooded animal with which it comes into direct contact, including humans. Deer ticks are active any time the temperature is above about 45
° F. However, most cases of infection happen between May and late August, when ticks are most active and   CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies 91people spend more time outdoors. Recent studies indicate that the tick must remain embedded in human skin for about 36 to 48 hours to transmit the disease. More information on Lyme disease may be available from your local or state health department, the American Lyme Disease Foundation (aldf.com), or the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (cdc.gov/features/lymedisease/).
What to Look For 
The ﬁ rst signal of infection may appear a few days or a few weeks after a tick bite. In 80 to 90 percent of all cases of Lyme disease, a rash starts as a small red area at the site of the bite. It may spread up to 7 inches across (Fig. 6-8). In fair-skinned people, the center may be a lighter color with the outer edges red and raised. This sometimes gives the rash a bull’s-eye appearance. In some individuals, the rash may appear to be solid red. In dark-skinned people, the area may look black and blue, like a bruise. The rash may or may not be warm to the touch and usually is not itchy or painful. If a rash does appear, it will do so in about 1 to 2 weeks and may last for about 3 to 5 weeks. Some people with Lyme disease never develop a rash. Other signals of Lyme disease include fever, headache, weakness, and joint and muscle pain. These signals are similar to signals of ﬂ u and can develop slowly. They might not occur at the same time as the rash. Lyme disease can get worse if it is not treated. Signals can include severe fatigue; fever; a stiff, aching neck; tingling or numbness in the ﬁ  ngers and toes; and facial paralysis. In its advanced stages Lyme disease may cause painful arthritis; numbness in the arms, hands or legs; severe headaches; long- or short-term memory loss; confusion; dizziness; and problems in seeing or hearing. Some of these signals could indicate problems with the brain or nervous system. Lyme disease may also cause heart problems such as an irregular or rapid heartbeat.When to Seek Medical Care
If rash or ﬂ u-like signals develop, the person should seek medical care immediately. A health care provider usually will prescribe antibiotics to treat Lyme disease. Antibiotics work quickly and effectively if taken as soon as possible. Most people who get treated early make a full recovery. If you suspect Lyme disease, do not delay seeking treatment. Treatment time is longer and less effective when the person has been infected for a long period of time. 
Preventing Tick-borne Diseases
Follow the guidelines presented in Focus on Prevention: How to Beat Those Little Critters  in this chapter for general tips on how to prevent contact with, and bites from, ticks when you are in wooded or grassy areas.To prevent tick-borne illnesses, always check for ticks immediately after outdoor activities. Most experts believe that the longer the tick stays attached to the skin, the greater the chances are of infection. Therefore, check for ticks at least once daily after having been outdoors. Quickly remove any ticks that you ﬁ nd before they become swollen with blood. Wash all clothing. Be sure to check pets because they can carry ticks into the house, where they can then attach themselves to people or other pets. Pets also can develop signals of tick-borne diseases. If you ﬁ nd a tick embedded in a person’s skin, it must be removed. With a gloved hand, grasp the tick with ﬁ ne-tipped and pointed tweezer that has a smooth inside FIGURE 6-7  Deer ticks are tiny and difﬁ cult to see. © iStockphoto .com/Martin Pietak.
 FIGURE 6-8  A person with Lyme disease may develop a rash. © iStockphoto.com/Heike Kampe.92  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s Manualsurface. Get as close to the skin as possible. Pull slowly, steadily and ﬁ rmly with no twisting (Fig. 6-9).Do not try to burn off the tick.
 ■
Do not apply petroleum jelly or nail polish  ■
to the tick. Put the tick in a container or jar with rubbing alcohol to kill it. Clean the bite area with soap and water and an antiseptic. Apply an antibiotic ointment if it is available and the person has no known allergies or sensitivities to the medication. Encourage the person to seek medical advice because of the risk of contracting a tick-borne disease. If you cannot remove the tick, have the person seek advanced medical care. 
Mosquito-Borne Illness: West Nile Virus
West Nile virus (WNV) is passed on to humans and other animals by mosquitoes that bite them after feeding on infected birds. Recently, WNV has been reported in some mild climate areas of North America and Europe. WNV cannot be passed from one person to another. Also, no evidence supports that humans can acquire the disease by handling live or dead birds infected with WNV. However, it is still a good idea to use disposable gloves when handling an infected bird. Contact your local health department for instructions on reporting and disposing of the bird’s body.For most people, the risk of infection by WNV is very low. Less than 1 percent of people who are bitten by mosquitoes develop any signals of the disease. In addition, relatively few mosquitoes actually carry WNV. People who spend a lot of time outdoors are at a higher risk for catching the disease. Only about 1 in every 150 people who are infected with WNV will become seriously ill. Preventing West Nile Virus
The easiest and best way to avoid WNV is to prevent mosquito bites. Speciﬁ cally, you can:Use insect repellents containing DEET 
 ■
(N, N-diethyl-meta-toluamide) when you are outdoors. Follow the directions on the package (see Focus on Prevention: Repelling Those Pests).Consider staying indoors at dusk and dawn, when 
 ■
mosquitoes are most active. If you have to be outdoors during these times, use insect repellent and wear long sleeves and pants. Light-colored clothing can help you to see mosquitoes that land on you.Make sure you have good screens on your windows 
 ■
and doors to keep mosquitoes out. Get rid of mosquito breeding sites by emptying 
 ■
sources of standing water outside of the home, such as from ﬂ owerpots, buckets and barrels. Also, change the water in pet dishes and replace the water in bird baths weekly, drill drainage holes in tire swings so that water drains out and keep children’s wading pools empty and on their sides when they are not being used.For more information, visit cdc.gov/westnile or call the CDC public response hotline at (888) 246-2675 (English), (888) 246-2857 (Español) or (866) 874-2646 (TTY).Source: CDC.gov and redcross.org
What to Look For
Most people infected with WNV have no signals. Approximately 20 percent develop mild signals, such as fever and aches, which pass on their own. The risk of severe disease is higher for people 50 years and older. People typically develop signals of WNV between 3 and 14 days after an infected mosquito bites them. Signals of WNV include the following:High fever
 ■
Headache ■
Neck stiffness  ■
Confusion ■
Coma ■
Tremors  ■
Convulsions  ■
Muscle weakness ■
Vision loss ■
Numbness ■
Paralysis ■
These signals may last several weeks. In some cases, WNV can cause fatal encephalitis, which is a swelling of the brain that leads to death.
FIGURE 6-9  Remove a tick by pulling slowly, steadily and ﬁ rmly with ﬁ ne-tipped tweezers.  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies 93When to Seek Care
If you develop signals of severe WNV illness, such as unusually severe headaches or confusion, seek medical attention immediately. Pregnant women and nursing mothers are encouraged to talk to their doctors if they develop signals that could indicate WNV. There is no speciﬁ c treatment for WNV infection or a vaccine to prevent it. In more severe cases, people usually need to go to the hospital, where they will receive intravenous ﬂ uids, assistance with breathing and nursing care.Spider Bites and Scorpion Stings 
Few spiders in the United States can cause serious illness or death. However, the bites of the black widow and brown recluse spiders can, in rare cases, kill a person (Fig. 6-10, A–B). Another dangerous spider is the northwestern brown, or hobo, spider. Widow spiders can be black, red or brown. The black widow spider is black with a reddish hourglass shape on the underside of its body and is the most venomous of the widow spiders. The brown recluse spider (also known as the violin or ﬁ ddleback spider) has a distinctive violin-shaped pattern on the back of its front body section. These spiders prefer dark, out-of-the-way places. Examples of places where these spiders live include wood, rock and brush piles; dark garages; and attics. People often are bitten on their arms and hands when reaching into these places. FOCUS ON PREVENTION
You can prevent bites and stings from insects, spiders, ticks or snakes by following these guidelines when you are in wooded or grassy areas:
Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants.  ■
Tuck your pant legs into your socks or boots.  ■
Use a rubber band or tape to hold pants  ■
against socks so that nothing can get under clothing.Tuck your shirt into your pants.
 ■
Wear light-colored clothing to make it easier  ■
to see tiny insects or ticks.When hiking in woods and ﬁ elds, stay in 
 ■
the middle of trails. Avoid underbrush and tall grass.If you are outdoors for a long time, check 
 ■
yourself several times during the day. Especially check in hairy areas of the body like the back of the neck and the scalp line.Inspect yourself carefully for insects or  ■
ticks after being outdoors or have someone else do it.Avoid walking in areas where snakes are 
 ■
known to live.If you encounter a snake, look around for 
 ■
others. Turn around and walk away on the same path on which you came.Wear sturdy hiking boots.
 ■
If you have pets that go outdoors, spray  ■
them with repellent made for that type of pet. Apply the repellent according to the label and check your pet for ticks often.If you will be in a grassy or wooded area 
 ■
for a long time or if you know that the area is highly infested with insects or ticks, consider using a repellent. Follow the directions carefully.HOW TO BEAT THOSE LITTLE CRITTERS
FIGURE 6-10, A–B  Bites from A, the black widow spider and B, the brown recluse spider can make a person very sick. Fig. A © iStockphoto.com/Mark Kostich, Fig. B Image © Miles Boyer, 2010, Used under license from Shutterstock.com.
AB94  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s ManualFIGURE 6-11  A scorpion. © iStockphoto.com/John Bell.
FOCUS ON PREVENTION
REPELLING THOSE PESTS
Insect repellent is used to keep away pests such as mosquitoes and ticks that sting and bite. DEET is the active ingredient in many insect repellents. Insect repellents that contain DEET are available in many different forms, including sprays, lotions and liquids. Using repellent with DEET is safe for most people. However, it is important to follow label directions and take proper precautions (see below).The amount of DEET in insect repellents ranges from less than 10 percent to over 30 percent. The more DEET that a product contains, the longer it will protect from mosquito and tick bites. For example, an insect repellent containing about 24 percent DEET provides about 5 hours of protection. Products with 10 percent DEET are as safe as products with 30 percent DEET when used properly. Precautions to follow when using products containing DEET include:
Apply products that contain DEET only once  ■
a day. Do not use DEET on infants under 2 months 
 ■
of age. Do not use a product that combines sunscreen 
 ■
with a DEET-containing insect repellent. Sunscreens wash off and need to be reapplied often. DEET does not wash off with water. Repeating applications may increase absorption of the chemical and cause possible toxic effects. Before using insect repellent, check the label carefully for the list of ingredients. If you are unsure whether the product is safe for you and your family to use, ask your health care provider. Use caution when considering insect repellents to be used by pregnant women, infants and children.If you use a repellent, follow these general rules: 
Keep all repellents out of the reach of children.  ■
To apply repellent to the face, ﬁ rst spray it on  ■
your hands and then apply it from your hands to your face. Avoid sensitive areas, such as the lips and eyes.Never use repellents on an open wound or 
 ■
irritated skin.Use repellents sparingly. One application will 
 ■
last 4 to 8 hours. Heavier or more frequent applications do not increase effectiveness.If you suspect that you are having a reaction to 
 ■
a repellent, wash the treated skin immediately and call your health care provider.Never put repellents on children’s hands. 
 ■
They may put them in their eyes or mouth.
For current information about pesticides, contact the National Pesticide Information Center at npic.orst.edu or at (800) 858-7378.
Scorpions live in dry regions such as the southwestern United States and Mexico. They live under rocks, logs and the bark of certain trees (Fig. 6-11). They are most active at night. Like spiders, only a few species of scorpions have a sting that can cause death. It is difﬁ cult to distinguish highly poisonous scorpions from nonpoisonous scorpions. Therefore, all scorpion stings should be treated as medical emergencies. 
What to Look For
Signals of spider bites depend on the amount of poison, called venom, injected and the person’s sensitivity to the venom. Most spider bites heal with no adverse effects or scarring. Signals of venomous spider bites can seem identical to those of other conditions and therefore can be difﬁ cult to recognize. The only way   CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies 95widow spider or brown recluse spider, stung by a scorpion or if the person has any other life-threatening conditions.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
If the person has been bitten by a venomous spider or stung by a scorpion:Wash the wound thoroughly.
 ■
Apply an antibiotic ointment, if the person has  ■
no known allergies or sensitivities to the medication, to prevent infection. Bandage the wound.
 ■
Apply an ice or cold pack to the site to reduce pain  ■
and swelling. Encourage the person to seek medical attention. 
 ■
Children and older adults may need antivenin to block the effects of the spider’s venom.If you transport the person to a medical facility, 
 ■
keep the bitten area elevated and as still as possible. 
Venomous Snake Bites
Snakebites kill few people in the United States. Of the estimated 7000 people bitten annually, fewer than 5 die (Fig. 6-12, A–D). Most snakebites occur near the home, not in the wild. Rattlesnakes account for most snakebites, and most of the deaths from snakebites in the United States. Most deaths occur because the bitten person has an allergic reaction, is in poor health or because too much time passes before he or she receives medical care.
What to Look For
Signals of a possibly venomous snakebite include: A bite mark.
 ■
Pain. ■
Swelling. ■
When to Call 9-1-1
If the bite is from a venomous snake such as a rattlesnake, copperhead, cottonmouth or coral snake call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number immediately. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives
To care for a venomous snake bite:Wash the wound.
 ■
Apply an elastic (pressure immobilization) bandage  ■
to slow the spread of venom through the lymphatic system by following these steps:to be certain that a spider has bitten a person is to have witnessed it. The bite of the black widow spider is the most painful and deadly of the widow spiders, especially in very young children and the elderly. The bite usually causes an immediate sharp pinprick pain, followed by a dull pain in the area of the bite. However, the person often does not know that he or she has been bitten until he or she starts to feel ill or notices a bite mark or swelling. Other signals of a black widow spider bite include:Rigid muscles in the shoulders, chest, back and  ■
abdomen.Restlessness.
 ■
Anxiety. ■
Dizziness. ■
Headache. ■
Excessive sweating. ■
Weakness. ■
Drooping or swelling of the eyelids. ■
The bite of the brown recluse spider may produce little or no pain initially. Pain in the area of the bite develops an hour or more later. A blood-ﬁ lled blister forms under the surface of the skin, sometimes in a target or bull’s-eye pattern. Over time, the blister increases in size and eventually ruptures, leading to tissue destruction and a black scab.The hobo spider also can produce an open, slow-healing wound.General signals of spider bites and scorpion stings may include:A mark indicating a possible bite or sting.
 ■
Severe pain in the sting or bite area. ■
A blister, lesion or swelling at the entry site.  ■
Nausea and vomiting. ■
Stiff or painful joints.  ■
Chills or fever.  ■
Trouble breathing or swallowing or signs  ■
of anaphylaxis.Sweating or salivating profusely.
 ■
Muscle aches or severe abdominal or back pain. ■
Dizziness or fainting.  ■
Chest pain. ■
Elevated heart rate.  ■
Infection at the site of the bite.  ■
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number immediately if you suspect that someone has been bitten by a black 96  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s ManualCheck for feeling, warmth and color of the  {
limb and note changes in skin color and temperature.Place the end of the bandage against the skin and 
 {
use overlapping turns.The wrap should cover a long body section, 
 {
such as an arm or a calf, beginning at the point farthest from the heart. For a joint, such as the knee or ankle, use ﬁ gure-eight turns to support the joint.Check above and below the injury for feeling, 
 {
warmth and color, especially ﬁ ngers and toes, after you have applied an elastic roller bandage. By checking before and after bandaging, you may be able to tell if any tingling or numbness is from the elastic bandage or the injury.Check the snugness of the bandaging—a ﬁ nger 
 {
should easily, but not loosely, pass under the bandage.Keep the injured area still and 
 { lower than the heart. The person should walk only if absolutely necessary.Do not
 ■  apply ice.Do not
 ■  cut the wound. Do not
 ■  apply suction.Do not ■  apply a tourniquet. Do not
 ■  use electric shock, such as from a car battery. 
Animal Bites
The bite of a domestic or wild animal can cause infection and soft tissue injury. The most serious possible result is rabies. Rabies is transmitted through the saliva of diseased animals such as skunks, bats, raccoons, cats, dogs, cattle and foxes.Animals with rabies may act strangely. For example, those that are usually active at night may be active in the daytime. A wild animal that usually tries to avoid people might not run from you. Rabid animals may drool, appear to be partially paralyzed, or act aggressively or strangely quiet. If not treated, rabies is fatal. Anyone bitten by an animal that might have rabies must get medical attention. Treatment for rabies includes a series of vaccine injections to build up immunity that will help ﬁ ght the disease. If an animal bites someone, try to get the person away from the animal without putting yourself in danger. Do not try to stop, hold or catch the animal. Do not touch a pet that may have come in contact with the animal’s saliva without using or wearing some form of protection like disposable gloves. FIGURE 6-12, A–D  Venomous snakes found in the United Statics include A, rattlesnake (Image © Audrey Snider-Bell, 2010 Used under license from Shutterstock.com). B, copperhead (© iStockphoto.com/Jake Holmes), C, cottonmouth (Image © Leighton Photography & Imaging, 2010 Used under license from Shutterstock.com), and D, coral snake (© iStockphoto.com/Mark Kostich).AB
A B
C D  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies 97What to Look For
Signals of an animal bite include:A bite mark.
 ■
Bleeding. ■
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if the wound is bleeding seriously or you suspect the animal might have rabies.If possible, try to remember the animal’s appearance and where you last saw it. When you call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number, the call taker will direct the proper authorities, such as animal control, to the scene.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
To care for an animal bite:Control bleeding 
 ■ ﬁ rst if the wound is bleeding seriously.Do not clean serious wounds. The wound will be 
 ■
cleaned at a medical facility. If bleeding is minor, wash the wound with soap and 
 ■
water then irrigate with clean running tap water.Control any bleeding. ■
Apply an antibiotic ointment to a minor wound,  ■
if the person has no known allergies or sensitivities to the medication, and cover the wound with a dressing. Watch for signals of infection.
 ■
Marine Life Stings
The stings of some forms of marine life are not only painful, but they can make you sick, and in some parts of the world, can kill you (Fig. 6-13, A–D). The side effects include allergic reactions that can cause breathing and heart problems, as well as paralysis and death. The lifeguards in your area should know the types of jellyﬁ sh that may be present.
What to Look For
Signals of marine life stings include:Possible puncture marks.
 ■
Pain. ■
Swelling. ■
Signs of a possible allergic reaction. ■
B
AB
FIGURE 6-13, A–D  The painful sting of some marine animals can cause serious problems: A, stingray (© iStockphoto.com/Dia Karanouh); 
B, Bluebottle jellyﬁ sh/Portuguese man-of-war (© iStockphoto.com/Mark Kostich); C, sea anemone (© iStockphoto.com/Omers); D, jellyﬁ sh (Image © Johan1900, 2010 Used under license from Shutterstock.com).
CD98  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s ManualWhen to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 or the local emergency number if the person does not know what stung him or her, has a history of allergic reactions to marine-life stings, is stung on the face or neck, or starts to have trouble breathing.
What to Do Until Help Arrives
If you encounter someone who has a marine-life sting:Get a lifeguard to remove the person from the 
 ■
water as soon as possible. If a lifeguard is not available, use a reaching assist, if possible (see Chapter 1). Avoid touching the person with your bare hands, which could expose you to the stinging tentacles. Use gloves or a towel when removing any tentacles.If you know the sting is from a jelly ﬁ sh, irrigate the 
 ■
injured part with large amounts of vinegar as soon as possible for at least 30 seconds. This can help to remove the tentacles and stop the injection of venom. Vinegar works best to offset the toxin, but a baking soda slurry also may be used if vinegar is not available. If the sting is known to be from a bluebottle jellyﬁ  sh, 
 ■
also known as a Portugese man-of-war, use ocean water instead of vinegar. Vinegar triggers further envenomation.Do not rub the wound, apply a pressure  ■
immobilization bandage or apply fresh water orother remedies because this may increase pain. Once the stinging action is stopped and tentacles 
 ■
removed, care for pain by hot-water immersion. Have the person take a hot shower if possible for at least 20 minutes. The water temperature should be as hot as can be tolerated (non-scalding) or about 113° F if the temperature can be measured. If you know the sting is from a stingray, sea urchin 
 ■
or spiny fish, flush the wound with tap water. Ocean water also may be used. Keep the injured part still and soak the affected area in non-scalding hot water (as hot as the person can stand) for at least 20 minutes or until the pain goes away. If hot water is not available, packing the area in hot sand may have a similar effect if the sand is hot enough. Then carefully clean the wound and apply a bandage. Watch for signals of infection and check with a health care provider to determine if a tetanus shot is needed.
POISONOUS PLANTS
Every year, millions of people suffer after coming into contact with poisonous plants such as poison ivy, poison sumac and poison oak (Fig. 6-14, A–C). 
FIGURE 6-14, A–C  A, poison ivy (Image © Tim Mainiero, 2010 Used under license from Shutterstock.com) ; 
B, poison sumac (Courtesy of www.poison-ivy.org); C, poison oak (Image © Dwight Smith, 2010 Used under license from Shutterstock.com).
A
BC  CHAPTER  6    |    Environmental Emergencies 99You often can avoid or limit the irritating effects of touching or brushing against poisonous plants by following these steps: Remove exposed clothing and wash the exposed area 
 ■
thoroughly with soap and water as soon as possible after contact. Wash clothing exposed to plant oils since the oils can 
 ■
linger on fabric. Wash your hands thoroughly after handling exposed clothing. Wash your hands after touching exposed pets.Put a paste of baking soda and water on the area 
 ■
several times a day if a rash or weeping sore begins to develop. Calamine lotion and antihistamines, such as Benadryl
®, may help to dry up the sores. See a health care provider if the condition gets worse 
 ■
or involves areas of the face or throat that could affect breathing. He or she may decide to give anti-inﬂ ammatory drugs, such as corticosteroids or other medications, to relieve discomfort. 
LIGHTNING
Every year, lightning causes more deaths in the United States than any other weather hazard, including blizzards, hurricanes, ﬂ oods, tornadoes, earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. The National Weather Service (NWS) estimates that lightning kills nearly 100 people annually and injures about 300 others.Lightning travels at speeds of up to 300 miles per second. Anything tall—a tower, tree or person—can become a path for the electrical current. A lightning strike can throw a person through the air, burn off clothes and cause the heart to stop beating. The most severe lightning strikes carry up to 50 million volts of electricity. This is enough electricity to light 13,000 homes. Lightning can “ﬂ ash” over a person’s body or it can travel through blood vessels and nerves to reach the ground.If a person survives a lightning strike, he or she may act confused. The person may describe the episode as getting hit on the head or hearing an explosion.
Prevent Lightning Injuries
What to do before a possible lightning storm : Pick campsites that meet safety precautions. 
 ■
Know local weather patterns, especially in summertime.  ■
Plan turnaround times (the amount of time you need  ■
to get back) in lightning-prone areas, based on your research, and stick to the plan.During thunderstorms, use common sense to prevent being struck by lightning. If a thunderstorm threatens, the NWS advises people to:Postpone activities immediately, and not wait  ■
for rain to begin. Thunder and lightning can strike without rain.Watch cloud patterns and conditions for signs of an 
 ■
approaching storm.Designate safe locations and move or 
 ■
evacuate to a safe location at the ﬁ rst sound of thunder. Every 5 seconds between the ﬂ  ash of lightning and the sound of thunder equals 1 mile of distance.Where possible, quickly ﬁ nd shelter in a substantial 
 ■
building (not a carport, open garage or covered patio), or in a fully enclosed metal vehicle, such as a hardtop car (not a convertible), truck or van, with the windows completely shut.Use the 
 ■ 30-30 rule where visibility is good and there is nothing obstructing your view of the thunderstorm. When you see lightning, count the time until you hear thunder. If that time is 30 seconds or less, the thunderstorm is within 6 miles. Seek shelter immediately. The threat of lightning continues for a much longer period than most people realize. Wait at least 30 minutes after the last clap of thunder before leaving shelter. If inside during a storm, keep away from windows. Injuries may occur from ﬂ ying debris or glass if a window breaks.Stay away from plumbing, electrical equipment and 
 ■
wiring during a thunderstorm. Do 
 ■ not use a corded telephone or radio transmitter except for emergencies.If there is a tornado alert, go to the basement of the 
 ■
lowest interior level of a building. In a lightning storm, reach safety by following these guidelines:Move downhill.
 ■
Do not stay in a meadow or any other  ■
wide-open space.Seek uniform cover, such as low rolling hills or trees 
 ■
of about the same size. If you are boating or swimming, get to land and move 
 ■
away from the shore.Avoid all of the following: 
 ■
Metal {
Anything connected to electrical power {
High places and high objects such as  {
tall treesOpen places 
 {
Damp, shallow caves and tunnels {
Overhangs  {
Flood zones  {100  First Aid/CPR/AED    |    Participant’s ManualPlaces obviously struck by lightning in the past  {
Long conductors, such as fences  {
If lightning is striking nearby when people are outside, they should assume a safe position:Squat or sit in a tight body position on insulating 
material such as a sleeping pad or a life jacket (Fig. 6-15). Take off any metal-framed packs and toss hiking poles away from the group.Do not lie down; instead, try to make as little contact 
with the ground as possible.If you feel your hair stand on end or your skin get tingly, cover your ears with your hands, close your eyes and get your head close to your knees. Avoid squatting or sitting close to other people. 
 Maintain a minimum distance of at least 15 feet between people. Keep everyone in sight if possible.
Lightning Injuries
Lightning injuries are serious and can be fatal. Being struck by lightning can cause cardiac and pulmonary arrest, neurological problems, blindness, deafness, burns, bone fractures, loss of hearing, eyesight and trauma.
What to Look For
When checking a person struck by lightning, look the person over from head to toe in the front and back for any of the following signals:Unconsciousness ■
Dazed, confused behavior ■
Trouble breathing ■
No breathing ■
Burn marks on the skin or other open wounds ■
Muscle, bone or joint injuries such as fractures  ■
or dislocations
When to Call 9-1-1
Call 9-1-1 immediately if a person is struck by lightning. Even if the person seems to have recovered soon after the incident, advanced medical care still is necessary because serious problems can develop later. 
What to Do Until Help Arrives 
Immediately perform CPR if needed. ■
Give care for any injuries as needed including care for thermal burns. Be ready to care for other conditions, such as hypothermia in a wet, injured person.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 
Outdoor activities in all kinds of weather are healthy and fun, but environmental emergencies can occur. Children and adults become seriously injured, and even die, from heat stroke, hypothermia, snakebites and lightning strikes.The good news is that you can prevent environmental emergencies most of the time. Be prepared for all kinds of weather and situations before you head out to hike, swim, ski or camp. Know how to dress appropriately, what precautions to take and what to do if a situation becomes uncertain.Even with excellent preparation, emergencies still happen. Know the signals—especially the early ones—of environmentally caused illnesses. This will allow you to make quick decisions for yourself or others. Quick decisions about when to call 9-1-1 and when to seek medical care can mean the difference between life and death in an environmental emergency! 


1. Don’t panic. You will be able to assess the situation more effectively. Remember, psychological support is also important. 2. Remember the ABCs of Life Support: Airways open – Open and maintain victim’s airway. Breathing restored – If victim is not breathing, begin rescue breathing techniques immediately. Circulation maintained – If no pulse is present, get assistance from a person certified in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) techniques. REMEMBER, to be able to perform CPR effectively, it is essential to be properly trained. 3. Check for bleeding. Apply direct pressure and elevate injured limb. 4. Look for signs of shock and broken bones (fractures). 5. Check for emergency medical identification on the victim. 6. Get professional medical help quickly. Know emergency numbers, such as 0 or 911. Telephone appropriate authorities (rescue squad, ambulance, police, poison control center or fire department) and describe the problem. Be sure to give your name, location and the number of persons involved. 7. Loosen any clothing that may restrict victim’s breathing or interfere with circulation. 8. Never give an unconscious person anything by mouth. 9. DO NOT move injured persons unless situation is life-threatening. Keep victim still, quiet and warm (except heat exhaustion and sunstroke). Victims with broken bones (fractures) should not be moved until a splint has been properly applied.


CAUTION DO NOT clean burns or break blisters. DO NOT remove any clothing that sticks to burn. DO NOT apply grease, ointment or medication to a severe burn. DO NOT use cotton or material with loose fibers to cover burns. TREATMENT First degree burns – redness or discoloration of skin surface; mild swelling and pain. 1. Apply cool, wet cloths or immerse in water. DO NOT use ice. 2. Blot gently; apply a dry, sterile pad if necessary. 3. Usually medical treatment is not necessary; however, if severe exist, call for professional medical help. Be alert for signs of shock. Second degree burns – deep burn with red or mottled appearance; blisters; considerable pain and swelling; skin surface appears wet. See treatment for first degree burns. If arms and legs are affected, elevate above heart level. Burns may be deep and potentially serious, requiring medical treatment depending on extent and location. Be alert for signs of shock and infection. MINOR FIRST AID SITUATIONS Third degree burns – deep tissue destruction with a white or charred appearance; no pain. Call for professional medical help immediately. Be alert for signs of shock. 


BEFORE INITIATING ANY FIRST AID TO CONTROL BLEEDING, BE SURE TO WEAR HEALTH CARE GLOVES TO AVOID CONTACT OF THE VICTIM’S BLOOD WITH YOUR SKIN. 1. CLEAN... wound and surrounding area gently with mild soap and rinse. Blot dry with sterile pad or clean dressing. 2. TREAT... to protect against contamination. 3. PROTECT... and cover to absorb fluids and prevent further contamination. (Handle only the edges of sterile pads or dressings.) Secure with first aid tape to help keep out dirt and germs.


SYMPTOMS May Include: Pain, redness, swelling TREATMENT 1. First wash your hands thoroughly, then gently wash affected area with mild soap and water. 2. Sterilize needle or tweezers by boiling for 10 minutes; wipe with a sterile pad before use. 3. Loosen skin around splinter with needle; use tweezers to remove splinter. If splinter breaks or is deeply lodged, consult professional medical help. 4. Cover with adhesive bandage or sterile pad, if necessary.


CAUTION In highly sensitive persons, do not wait for symptoms to appear. Get professional medical help immediately. If breathing difficulties occur, start rescue breathing techniques; if pulse is absent, begin CPR. SIGNS Signs of allergic reaction may include: Nausea; severe swelling; breathing difficulties; bluish face, lips and fingernails; shock or unconsciousness. TREATMENT 1. For mild or moderate symptoms, wash with soap and cold water. Remove stinger or venom sac with tweezers or by gently scraping with fingernail (DO NOT squeeze). 2. For multiple stings, soak affected area in cool bath. Add one tablespoon of baking soda per quart of water


BEFORE INITIATING ANY FIRST AID TO CONTROL BLEEDING, BE SURE TO WEAR HEALTH CARE GLOVES TO AVOID CONTACT OF THE VICTIM’S BLOOD WITH YOUR SKIN. TREATMENT 1. Act quickly. Have victim lie down. Elevate injured limb higher than heart unless you suspect a broken bone. 2. Control bleeding by applying direct pressure on the wound with a sterile pad or clean cloth. 3. If bleeding is controlled by direct pressure, bandage firmly to protect wound. Check pulse to be sure bandage is not too tight. 4. If bleeding is not controlled by use of direct pressure, apply a tourniquet only as a last resort. 5. Call for professional medical help immediately. 6. If you are bleeding and have no one to help you, call for professional medical help. Lie down, so your body weight applies pressure to the bleeding site.


ESTABLISH NON-RESPONSIVENESS AND ACTIVATE EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES (EMS) OR CALL FOR HELP. SYMPTOMS May include: Shortness of breath, dizziness, chest pain, rapid pulse, bluish-purple skin color, dilated pupils, unconsciousness. TREATMENT For victim who has stopped breathing: 1. Lay victim flat on back. Tilt the head back with one hand to open airway, while placing two fingers of the other hand under the chin. 2. Clear airway, using your fingers in a hooked fashion to remove any solid or liquid obstructions. 3. Look, listen, and feel for respiratory movement for 5 seconds. If breathing is absent, pinch victim’s nostrils closed, take a deep breath, completely cover victim’s mouth, and give two slow, full breaths. 4. Check for carotid pulse in neck and for signs of breathing. 5. If pulse is present: For adults – continue rescue breathing at a rate of one strong every five seconds. Re-check for pulse and breathing every twelve breaths. For infants and small children – breathe shallow breaths at a rate of one every three seconds or 20 per minute. 6. If pulse is not present, begin Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR). For adults... Exert enough pressure to depress the breastplate 1 1/2 to 2 inches. Continue compressions at a rate of "one and two and..." Every fifteen compressions should be followed with a pause by two rescue breaths. 


For children... Use the heel of only one hand to depress the breastplate 1 to 1 1/2 inches. Continue compressions at a rate of 100 per minute "one, two, three..." Every five compressions should be followed without a pause by one rescue breath. For infants... Use only fingertips. Apply moderate pressure to depress breastplate 1/2 to 3/4 inches. Continue compressions at a rate of at least 100 per minute. Every five compressions (3 seconds) should be followed without a pause by one rescue breath.


Break or Crack in a Bone SYMPTOMS May include: The victim hearing or feeling the bone break; area tender to touch with pain in one spot; swelling noted around suspected fracture; limb in an unnatural position; painful movement; abnormal motion; loss of function; grating sensation; discoloration of affected area. TREATMENT 1. Keep victim warm and still, treat for shock if necessary. DO NOT move victim until a splint has been applied unless there is danger of a life-threatening emergency. 2. If bone is suspected to be broken but does not pierce the skin (closed fracture), splint the limb before the victim is moved, immobilizing the joint above and below the suspected fracture site. 3. If broken bone pierces the skin (open or compound fracture), apply pressure to appropriate pressure point to control bleeding. DO NOT try to straighten limb, return it to a natural position, or replace bone fragments. DO NOT touch or clean the wound. Secure a sterile pad or clean cloth firmly in place over the wound and tie with strong bandages or cloth strips. 4. If victim must be moved, apply a splint to prevent further damage. Use anything that will keep the broken bones from moving, including broomsticks, boards or rolled magazines. Pad splints with cotton, clothes or clean cloths tied firmly (but not tightly) in place. If victim complains of numbness, loosen splint. 5. Get professional medical help immediately


TREATMENT 1. Remove contaminated clothing. 2. Flush burned area with cool water for at least 5 minutes. 3. Treat as you would any major or minor burn. 4. If eye has been burned: A. Immediately flood face, inside of eyelid and eye with cool running water for at least 15 minutes. Turn head so water does not drain into uninjured eye. Lift eyelid away from eye so the inside of lid can also be washed. B. If eye has been burned by a dry chemical, lift any loose particles off the eye with the corner of a sterile pad or clean cloth. C. Cover both eyes with dry sterile pads, clean cloths, or eye pads; bandage in place. 5. Consult professional medical help.


Partial Obstruction with Good Air Exchange SYMPTOMS May include: Forceful cough with wheezing sounds between coughs. TREATMENT Encourage victim to cough as long as good air exchange continues. DO NOT interfere with attempts to expel object. Partial or Complete Airway Obstruction in Conscious Victim with Poor Air Exchange SYMPTOMS May include: Weak cough; high-pitched crowing noises during inhalation; inability to breathe, cough or speak; gesture of clutching neck between thumb and index finger; exaggerated breathing efforts; dusky or bluish skin color. TREATMENT For Adult Victim If victim is standing or sitting: 1. Stand slightly behind victim. 2. Place your arms around victim’s waist; place your fist, thumb side in, against victim’s abdomen, slightly above the navel and below the rib margins. 3. Grasp fist with your other hand and exert a quick upward thrust. Repeat (five times in a rapid succession) if necessary (Heimlich Maneuver or manual thrust.) Complete Airway Obstruction in Unconscious Victim 1. Activate EMS system first. Follow breathing problems section


PENETRATING OBJECTS Such as Sticks or Pieces of Metal Protruding from Body SYMPTOMS May include: Profuse bleeding; swelling and redness of injured tissue. CAUTION DO NOT remove penetrating object. TREATMENT 1. Get professional medical help immediately. 2A. If victim is fixed to object (impaled), cut it off at a safe distance from skin. Immobilize object with thick dressings made from sterile pads or clean cloths secured in place with first aid tape, a belt or a bandage. B. If object is protruding from victim, DO NOT move it. Immobilize object with thick dressings made from sterile pads or clean cloths secured in place with first aid tape, a belt or a bandage. Do not apply bandage so tightly that breathing is restricted. 3. If object penetrates chest and victim complains of discomfort or pressure, quickly loosen bandage on one side and reseal. Watch carefully for recurrence. Repeat procedure if necessary. 4. If breathing problems develop, begin rescue breathing techniques immediately. 5. Treat for shock.


POISONING CALL 911, YOUR LOCAL FIRST AID SQUAD, OR POISON CONTROL CENTER IMMEDIATELY, BEFORE ADMINISTERING FIRST AID. TREATMENT 1. DO NOT give any other first aid if victim is unconscious or is having convulsions. Begin rescue breathing techniques or CPR if necessary. If victim is convulsing, protect from further injury; loosen tight clothing if possible. 2. If professional medical help cannot be reached immediately: A. DO NOT induce vomiting if poison is unknown, a corrosive substance (i.e., acid, cleaning fluid, lye, drain cleaner), or a petroleum product (i.e., gasoline, turpentine, paint thinner, lighter fluid). DO NOT use activated charcoal. B. Induce vomiting if poison is known and is not a corrosive substance or petroleum product. To induce vomiting: Give adult one ounce of syrup of ipecac (1/2 ounce for child) followed by four or five glasses of water. If victim has vomited, follow with one ounce of powdered, activated charcoal in water, if available. 3. Take poison container (or vomitus if poison is unknown) with victim to the hospital.


SEVERED BODY PARTS (AVULSION) Tissue is Partially or Completely Cut or Torn from Body CAUTION Wrap the detached part of the body in something clean, and send it to the hospital with the victim so that it may be reattached if possible. Ice may be used to keep the detached part cool; however, prevent it from direct contact with ice and/or from freezing. TREATMENT 1. Stop the bleeding immediately. 2. Treat for shock if necessary. If breathing problems are present, begin rescue breathing techniques. 3. If wound is not deep or is not bleeding severely, gently cleanse with mild soap and warm water. Cover with a sterile dressing or clean cloth and bandage. 4. Get professional medical help immediately


SHOCK Disturbance in the Circulation of the Blood That Can Upset All Body Functions CAUTION Shock is a dangerous condition and can be fatal. Expect some degree of shock in any emergency. DO NOT give anything by mouth. SYMPTOMS May include: Unusual weakness or faintness; cold, pale, clammy skin; rapid, weak pulse; shallow, irregular breathing; chills; nausea; unconsciousness. TREATMENT 1. Treat known cause of shock as quickly as possible (i.e., breathing difficulties, bleeding, severe pain). 2. Maintain an open airway. If victim vomits, gently turn head to side. 3. Keep victim warm and lying flat. (In cases of head or chest injuries, with no chance of broken neck or back, elevate head and shoulders 10 inches higher than feet if possible.) 4. Get professional medical help immediately. 5. DO NOT give anything by mouth. SPRAINS Injury to Soft Tissue Surrounding Joint Due to Wrenching or Laceration of Ligaments, Muscles, Tendons or Blood Vessels SYMPTOMS May include: Painful movement, swelling, discoloration and tenderness around injured joint. CAUTION Victim may have a broken bone (fracture) and should be examined by a medical professional. TREATMENT 1. If ankle or knee is affected, do not allow victim to walk. Loosen or remove shoe; elevate leg. 2. Protect skin with thin towel or cloth. Then apply cold, wet compresses or cold packs to affected area. Never pack joint in ice or immerse in icy water. 3. Consult professional medical assistance for further treatment if necessary. TRANSPORTING AN INJURED PERSON If injury involves neck or back, DO NOT move victim unless absolutely necessary. Call for professional medical help. If victim must be pulled to safety, move body lengthwise, not sideways. If possible, slide a coat or blanket under the victim: A. Carefully turn victim toward you and slip a half-rolled blanket under back.


B. Turn victim on side over blanket, unroll, and return victim onto back. C. Drag victim head first, keeping back as straight as possible. If victim must be lifted: A. Support each part of the body. Position a person at victim’s head to provide additional stability. Use a board, shutter, table top or other firm surface to keep body as level as possible. UNCONSCIOUSNESS Victim Is Not Mentally Aware; Does Not Respond to Sensory Stimuli, Such as Sound or Light TREATMENT 1. Call for professional medical help. 2. DO NOT move victim or give anything by mouth. 3. Keep victim warm; loosen any tight clothing. 4. Maintain an open airway. If breathing difficulties develop, begin rescue breathing techniques immediately. 5. Check for emergency medical identification tag to help determine cause of unconsciousness. WOUNDS (SEVERE) Breaks in Skin or Mucus Membrane (Open) or Injuries to Underlying Tissue Breaks in Skin (Closed) CAUTION Some wounds, such as small cuts or minor scrapes, require only simple first aid measures; others, however, require immediate first aid followed by professional medical treatment. Before treating any serious incision, abrasion or laceration with extensive bleeding, act quickly to control bleeding. Get professional medical help immediately. Any wound can become contaminated and infected


COLD EXPOSURE TREATMENT 1. Move victim into warm room as soon as possible. 2. Be alert for breathing difficulties; start rescue breathing techniques if necessary. 3. Remove wet or frozen clothing. Immediately rewarm victim by wrapping in blankets or placing in tub of warm, not hot, water. Dry victim thoroughly after bath. WEATHER-RELATED SITUATIONS 4. Give victim hot liquids to drink, only if conscious (not alcohol). 5. Follow treatment for frostbite. 6. Consult professional medical help if indicated. FROSTBITE CAUTION DO NOT break blisters, rub affected area, or apply heat lamps or hot water bottles. DO NOT attempt rapid thawing if refreezing is a possibility. TREATMENT 1. Warm affected areas as quickly as possible by covering with clothing and blankets or immersing frozen part in warm, not hot, water. If frostbitten area has been thawed and refrozen, then warm at room temperature. 2. Discontinue warming techniques as soon as affected area becomes flushed. Expect swelling and pain after thawing. Victim may require an analgesic. 3. Gently exercise affected area after it has been rewarmed. 4. DO NOT apply dressings or clothing unless transportation is required for medical help. If fingers or toes are affected, separate with sterile pads or clean cloths. 5. Elevate frostbitten areas, but not higher than heart. 6. Get professional medical help. HEAT EXHAUSTION (Heat Prostration) SYMPTOMS May include: Fatigue; irritability; headache; faintness; weak, rapid pulse; shallow breathing; cold, clammy skin; profuse perspiration. TREATMENT 1. Instruct victim to lie down in a cool, shaded area or an air-conditioned room. Elevate feet. 2. Massage legs toward heart. 3. Only if victim is conscious, give cool water or electrolyte solution every 15 minutes until victim recovers. 4. Use caution when letting victim first sit up, even after feeling recovered. SUNBURN TREATMENT 1. Treat for first or second degree burns. 2. Treat for shock if necessary. 3. Cool victim as rapidly as possible by applying cool, damp cloths or immersing in cool, not cold, water


SUNSTROKE (Heat Stroke) SYMPTOMS May include: Extremely high body temperature (106˚F or higher); hot, red, dry skin; absence of sweating; rapid pulse; convulsions; unconsciousness. CAUTION Sunstroke is a life-threatening emergency. TREATMENT 1. Get professional medical help immediately. 2. Lower body temperature quickly by placing victim in partially filled tub of cool, not cold, water (avoid over-cooling). Briskly sponge victim’s body until temperature is reduced; then towel dry. If tub is not available, wrap victim in cold, wet sheets in well-ventilated room or use fans and air conditioners until body temperature is reduced. 3. DO NOT give stimulating beverages, such as coffee, tea, or soda.


HOW DOES A COMPASS WORK? The compass is a small tool with few parts. By itself, a compass cannot tell you where you are or what you are looking at, but it CAN indicate direction. Basically, a compass is a magnet, shaped like a needle, mounted on a pivot. The needle is free to turn in response to the pull of the Earth’s magnetic field. A housing protects the needle.Some compasseshave other useful optional features such as base plate. HAVE A DECENT COMPASS, AND IT NEED NOT BE EXPENSIVE probably around $20-30.  A rotating housing with BOTH cardinal points (N-E-S-W: North East South West) AND degrees (0-60) with degrees marked every 2 degrees   Transparent base plate on which the housing is mounted.  Direction-of-travel arrow on the base plate (for sighting & following bearings)  Straight edges that make it easy to measure and plot directions on a map.  A built in magnifier (useful for seeing small map symbols or other small print)  A red orienting arrow printed on the bottom of the housing (north end is usually red)


A COMPASS FACE is a circle marked off in degrees from 0 to 360. The circle is measured clockwise beginning at the top (0 degrees NORTH). One fourth of the way around the circle is an angle of 90 degrees EAST. SOUTH is located at 180 degrees, exactly half-circle across from NORTH. At 270 degrees is WEST. NORTH EAST- SOUTH WEST are called CARDINAL POINTS. INTERESTING FACTOID: A COMPASS ROSE appears on many maps as early as the 14th Century. Drawn by an early Portuguese mapmaker, why the first 32- point compass rose has a fleur-de-lis which indicates NORTH and a Cross that indicates EAST to the Holy Land


2.3 HOW TO USE A COMPASS FOR MAXIMUM ACCURACY  Keep the compass LEVEL. Tilting keeps the needle from swinging freely.  Hold the compass directly in front of you, not at an angle.  Directly face the object to which you are measuring the bearing (more about that in a minute).  To align the magnetic needle and orienting arrow, hold the compass close so that you look DOWN on the face, instead of across it, or sideways at it. This will help be sure that the needle lies exactly straight over the orienting arrow, with the points lined up. 2.4 TAKING A BEARING & FOLLOWING IT Taking a bearing is measuring a direction from one point on the ground to another. HOW DO I TAKE A BEARING? Hold the compass in one hand, directly in front of you. Rotate your body and the compass together until the direction of travela arrow points in direction you wantt o go. THEN rotate the bezel on the compass until the NORTH end of the magnetic arrow (usually red) lines up with the NORTH end of the orienting arrow. READ THE NUMBER on the bezel directly opposite the bearing index. This is the BEARING.


STEPS TO FOLLOWING A BEARING 1. MEASURE THE BEARING. After the bearing is set, do not turn the housing while you are following it. 2. LOOK AHEAD along your line of travel and choose a landmark to keep in sight, and a landmark that you can get to from your starting point. The points available to select will vary depending on vegetation, terrain and weather. LOOK BACK to have a point behind you as a landmark in case its needed 3. Now, WALK DIRECTLY towards your reachable landmark. Watch where you are going, while loookin gout for rocks and snakes. walk while staring at your compass falling over things. The landmark keeps you on course 4. When you reach your landmark, VERIFY that you are going in the desired direction. Again, hold the compass in front of you And turn body & compass together until the north-seeking needle end matches the pointed end of the orienting arrow


5. Select another landmark along the bearing line and walk to IT. Repeat the process as often as needed to cover the distance to your desired point. 6. ORIENT YURSELF WITH THE COMPASS AT EACH LANDMARK TO BE SURE YOU ARE HEADED IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION FOR THE NEXT LEG. Reason: when traveling on any hill or incline, the body tends to want to travel downhill, even if slightly. Trust your compass to verify your bearing and course. 7. If extended visibility is difficult, you and your hiking partner can establish each other as “portable landmarks”


Note and take a bearing on a landmark ahead of you, take a bearing on a landmark exactly opposite and behind you. Now in some nondestructive way, mark where you are with something that can be seen. From a distance rocks, a scrap of toilet tissue perhaps. When you walk to the far landmark, sight back lining up the landmark that was behind you originally with the temporary marker you set


Make careful, accurate sightings when selecting landmarks (both intermediate and destination landmarks). Follow the direction-of-travel arrow when walking a bearing. Recheck bearings carefully and often, so as to avoid the accumulation of small errors Use bearings over short points when possible. Aim for a line, rather than a point, whenever possible. For example, a road or a stream will be easier to hit than a specific feature on the road, or a waterfall on the stream. When sighting a bearing, it is best to select points that will always be in sight, for example, a prominent tree and a rock crag. That way, if you have to detour off course, you can easily resume your course line once the detour is done. Continually relate your progress to your map, and as needed, update your own drawn map


Each year, New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) Forest Rangers search for about 200 lost or stranded people. Many people can avoid this potentially life-threatening situation if they prepare for their trip in the woods. Learn to use a topographic map, GPS and compass and always carry them Trust your compass. Many people get lost because they don’t believe their compass. Global Positioning Systems (GPS) units have become very affordable and can be extremely useful. However, they are only an aid to navigation and must be used along with a compass and map. Knowing your GPS coordinates may be of little help if you cannot fi gure out which way and how far you need to walk to reach safety. Pick out landmarks that are easy to fi nd at the end of the day If you hunt or hike south of a road that runs east-west, for example, then you know that by walking north, you will eventually come to the road. Keep these kinds of landmarks in mind before your trip and during it, especially when light wanes at the end of the day. Carry a small fl ashlight, extra batteries and bulb Few things are more frustrating than being stuck in the dark. If you do have to spend the night in the woods, even a small fl ashlight will be a great help in fi nding shelter or gathering fi rewood. Bring a watch and know what time it gets dark Many people leave too little time to get out of the woods before dark. Cloudy days keep you from telling time by the sun. Carry a cell phone If you will be in an area where coverage is available, then a cell phone with a fully charged battery can be a lifesaver. Leaving word with a contact person, however, is still highly recommended.


Bring waterproof matches and fi re starter material If you do have to spend a night in the woods, a fi re can make the difference between a tolerable experience and a nightmare. Waterproof matches work better than cigarette lighters when wet, and some lighters can be hard to operate with cold hands. A candle and strips of paper can be used to help light a fi re. Wear a pack to carry clothing, food and water For a short trip, you will need at least a fanny pack, but a knapsack is better for cold weather use. Remember, it’s easy to stay warm when you’re moving, but if you have to spend the night out, you will want all the clothing you can get. Hypothermia can kill even when temperatures are above freezing. A tiny emergency “space blanket” can save your life. Prepare for the weather Check the forecast before your trip, and assume the worst. If the forecast calls for a chance of showers, assume it will pour. Rain gear is a must. If the forecast predicts fl urries, expect a snowstorm. In cold, wet weather, wear wool or synthetics. Do not wear cotton (including blue jeans), as it absorbs water and drains your body heat. A hat that covers the ears is also very important in cold weather. Without one, your head and neck can radiate up to 40 percent of your body heat. Bring extra food and water Your body can’t function unless you keep it fueled. Becoming dehydrated or not eating enough can cause hypothermia, which can lead to physical debilitation or mental confusion and poor decision-making. If you plan on using drinking water from streams in the woods, fi lter or treat it to avoid intestinal distress or disease. Leave word with someone about your whereabouts and expected time of return Make sure your contact person has the phone numbers of the local Forest Ranger, DEC emergency dispatch (518-891-0235) and the county emergency dispatch. 


If You Are Lost or Injured If, despite your best efforts, you become lost or injured while in the woods, it is important to stay calm and keep from taking rash actions that might cause your situation to worsen. Remember “STOP”: S is for Sit Down: This is the fi rst and most important step in staying calm. T is for Think: Ask yourself the most important questions, such as “How did I get here?” “How much time is left before it gets dark?” O is for Observe: Try to identify landmarks, such as mountains that can help you fi gure out your position. Listen for sounds, like traffi c, running water or even gunshots, which can help you fi nd your way back to safety. Ask yourself the most likely places to look for fi rewood and shelter. P is for Plan: Decide if you should try to make it out of the woods or stay put until morning. In making this all-important decision, consider how much easier it is to gather fi rewood during daylight. The rule of thumb is to make a pile as large as you think will last the night, then make 10 more just like it. People who have been forced to spend the night in the woods have been surprised by how much wood they need to keep their fi re going. Whatever you do, try not to panic. Most people don’t think it will happen to them, but it does...and often. Panic leads to wasted time, poor decisions, and often, an unnecessary worsening of your predicament. By taking a few precautions before entering the woods, you can make your trip safer and more enjoyable. It will also make it easier on your friends and family who await your return. 


Basic Survival Kit (right) Matches in waterproof container Fire starters, such as candle and strips of paper Flashlight with extra batteries and bulb Map, GPS and compass Medications that will be needed during your trip Shelter, such as emergency blanket or plastic sheet Knife or multi-use tool with cutting surface Signal device, such as a whistle or mirror Food that is high-energy and lightweight Water, or a way to purify water you fi nd, such as tablets or fi lter Cord, such as 50 feet of nylon parachute cord Toilet paper Cold Weather Kit (Reasonably cold weather and/or longer trips) All of the above-listed items plus Rain gear Extra hat Extra socks Gloves (NOT cotton) Extra hand warmers Small fi rst-aid kit Inclement Weather Kit (right) (More severe weather; day trip or overnight) All of the above-listed items plus Medium jacket Extra food and water Extra gloves Mittens Stove and sleeping bag


Ever have a feeling of being lost in life? Well, taking a long hike may be of some help there, but you can’t “find yourself” very well if you get lost on the trail. Here are some general tips to help you stay found: Bring a map and compass, even on short day hikes. Don’t tempt fate. Even if you know this trail like the back of your hand, snow, fog and darkness may obscure familiar features. A high quality topographic map is worth every penny – this is not the area to save a few cents. Know how to use your map and compass. Purchase a basic navigation book, join the local orienteering club, or consult a local outfitter. Know how to find north, to orient you map to the terrain and how to take a heading. Make practicing fun by taking a hike with a more experienced navigator and learning some “tricks of the trade.” Don’t rely solely on GPS. Global Positioning Systems, electronic devices that pinpoint your position by satellite signals, can be hugely helpful, but are vulnerable to mechanical shock and battery failure. Learn to use a map and compass before you decide to rely on GPS. Even then, always bring a compass and map as backup. Pay attention! Which side of the trail does the stream run on? Where is the sun in the sky? Did you see that big rock on the way in? Details like this can make navigating a simple matter, leaving you to just enjoy your hike. Also, if you are returning on the same trail you used on the way in, turn around periodically and look at the trail, especially where it intersects with another trail or a decommissioned trail. It looks different in reverse! Despite even the best preparations, sometimes we still get lost. If this happens to you, keep these thoughts in mind: Don’t panic. The worst possible thing you can do upon realizing you are lost is to panic. Having stated that, it’s also a very natural reaction – so be prepared to consciously overcome it. If you’ve brought your 10 Essentials and somebody is expecting you to check in, you’re in a very good place. Stay calm and take some deep breaths. Odds are that you haven’t strayed too far from the path, and by staying calm, you might be able to hear other hikers nearby. Running around in a panicked frenzy looking for the trail will likely only lead you further from the trail than you are and cause you to become more disoriented and frustrated. If you’re unable to locate yourself on your map and you’ve calmly attempted to retrace your steps a little, and you are genuinely lost, stay put. Rescuers will be looking for you where they know you’ve been hiking. Don’t put yourself in more danger by wandering further from a known location. If you do so, you will also be putting rescuers in greater danger as they will have to cover more ground and use more time to locate you. The only time to not stay put, would be if there is a safety issue staying where you are, perhaps due to flooding or avalanche potential. While it’s nothing you should ever rely on, check for a cell phone signal if you have a cell phone. Periodically blow your emergency whistle in bursts of three. Be visible to rescuers – wear or display bright clothing, use a signal mirror, etc. Even your camera’s flash can be used to signal your presence. If you can do so safely, making a small campfire can not only keep you warm overnight, but can also be good for your morale. 


Topographic maps are ideal for wilderness navigation because they use contour lines to the show the shape of landforms (mountains, valleys, ridges, saddles). A contour line connects points at the same elevation.


Here's one of my favorite topo maps, which shows the summit of Mt. Rainier. See how the contour lines outline the shape of the crater? 


A lot of hikers who faithfully carry maps avoid using compasses. Because let's face it. They can be a little intimidating.


If you are a person who hated high school geometry and hasn't picked up a protractor since, you may squinch at the thought of shooting a bearing or triangulating a location.


But fear not. You can actually get a lot of use out of your compass using first grade math (or none at all). Let's take a look at some basic skills. 


Choosing a Compass
You may own a novelty compass that's hanging on your keychain or integrated into the end of a trekking pole. But for backcountry navigation, you're going to need a proper compass with a bezel and a baseplate like this Suunto A-10 compass:


Topo maps are oriented toward true north (the North Pole).


However, the earth's magnetic pole (which compass needles point at) doesn't actually match up with the North Pole. And to further complicate matters, the magnetic pole moves around over time.


So when you're using a map and compass together, you need to know the distance (in degrees) between magnetic north and true north so that you can account for it in your calculations.


This distance is known as magnetic declination. It varies with your location, and it also changes over time.


Here are some useful compass features to consider when making your choice: 


Sighting mirror — Folds over so you can shoot a bearing and read the compass at the same time. In my experience, this makes bearings much more accurate.


Clinometer — Allows you to measure slope angle. Especially useful for mountaineers and winter hikers and backpackers who need to check for avalanche terrain.


Declination correction — In just a minute, we'll talk about magnetic declination, an annoying feature of geology that introduces some extra math into your compass work. However, if your compass has declination adjustment, you can set it once and save yourself some adding and subtracting. (You'll need to update it if you travel to a new location, however.)


Luminescent markings — Make the compass markings easier to read at night.


Global needle — Most compasses only work in the northern or southern hemisphere, but global needle compasses work everywhere.


To find out the current magnetic declination for your area, print a CalTopo map (or just pull up a print preview on the screen). The declination will appear at the bottom to the right of the scale.


Or you can use NOAAs handy calculator. 


Declination examples
In April 2018 in Denver, Colorado, USA, the magnetic declination is 8 degrees and 11 minutes EAST (according to NOAA). 


There are 60 minutes in a degree, so let's round that number to 8 degrees.


Because degrees are measured clockwise from true north, numbers to the east are positive. So we'll call this +8 degrees.


So when using a compass to orient myself in Colorado, I need to subtract 8 degrees from my intended direction of travel. (Or, if I have a compass with declination adjustment, I can set it to -8.)


Check the website and see if you get the same number for Denver. Then check the magnetic declination for your own zip code. How many degrees is it? And is it positive (to the east) or negative (to the west)? 


How to read a compass
Simply using your compass to orient yourself can solve many problems in the wilderness: 


Traveling the right direction when visibility is limited (for example, in a snow storm or dense forest)


Navigating toward a catchline (a linear feature like a road, trail, or river) when you are lost


Making sure you descend the correct side of a summit (ahem)


Determining the direction of sunrise and sunset


Before you start to use your compass, it's helpful to familiarize yourself with its parts. Here's a helpful diagram.


Diagram of compass parts
Diagram of compass parts


Next, watch this video to get yourself and your compass pointed in the right direction.




Aligning your map
This video shows you how to turn your map in the right direction so that what you see on the map matches what you see in the landscape.




Navigating toward a catchline when you're lost
A catchline is a long linear feature (river, coastline, trail, road) that you know you can reach by walking in a certain direction. This quick video shows you how they work and how to identify them on topo maps:




Advanced skills
More things you can do with a compass: 


Shoot bearings


Triangulate bearings to locate yourself on a map


Walk a bearing in dense forest where visibility is limited


Navigate around obstacles and get back on track


Use back bearings and leap frogging to improve accuracy


And much more!


It's hard to learn these skills from a single blog post, so I definitely encourage you to take a map and compass course, particularly one that takes you into the field to practice. For inexpensive options, check out your local mountain club or outfitter.


To see some of the skills you'll learn, check out this excellent video from REI. (The section on taking bearings starts around 3:20.)




Phone Apps and Technology
While you should never trust your life to a battery (or a finicky iPhone that shuts off in the cold), GPS devices can make navigation faster and more reliable.


I recommend adopting them after you've mastered your map and compass basics for two reasons.


First, you won't be tempted to cheat (because they do make everything easier).


And second, knowing some map and compass principles will help you better understand your technology and do more with it.


Avoiding Getting Lost (or Staying Found)
Participants, particularly ones without much field experience, need to be taught early on how to
avoid becoming separated from their group as well as what to do if they become disoriented or
lost.
Guidelines for Staying Found
In and around a field camp:
• Walk your group around camp and establish landmarks and/or handrails that define the
perimeter.
• Establish a simple call and response within your group. If someone feels disoriented
around camp, they can call out and anyone within earshot can respond to help direct them
back to camp. Akin to the “Marco-Polo” game played by kids in a swimming pool, this
can create a fun low-stress way to encourage participants to communicate to their group
before they get completely lost. This also can become an easy way to call your group
together for meetings.
• At night, encourage participants to bring a light and not walk very far from the main
camp.
When leaving camp such as on short day hikes,
• Take some minimal “survival” supplies- such as water, layers, food, maps, flashlight,
basic first aid supplies, fire-making supplies, whistle, cell phone, etc.
• Make sure all individuals or groups inform instructors where they are going, when they
plan to return, who is going with them, and why.
• Encourage participants to pay attention to the landscape around them when out walking:
what cardinal directions are they walking, did they walk up or down hill, what significant
landmarks did they pass or walk beside (streams, cliffs, meadows, etc.)
• Time the walk- this can help determine how long it may take to return to camp
When out on long hikes, do all of the above for short hikes and
• Seriously consider teaching participants basic map/compass skills, GPS-use, etc. before
sending participants far from camp without instructors/leaders.
• Stay together and travel in groups of at least 4. If one person gets injured, one can assist
them while the other 2 can return together to camp to get further help.
• If cell service is available, make a cell-phone contact plan.
• Set clear expectations for what participants should do if they are lost, delayed, or cannot
make it back to camp as planned. (see section below on what to do if lost)
What to do if Disoriented or Lost:
People who become separated from others in a remote outdoor setting tend to panic and often
end up moving hastily in the wrong direction from others and can quickly become truly lost. For
this reason, it’s critical to brief your participants beforehand on what to do if they feel lost or
disoriented.
• Stay calm. Do your best to get your bearings. Look for landmarks. Listen for people.
Yell using the call/response technique described above. Blow a whistle if you have one.
• If you are at all in doubt about where you are and which direction to proceed, STAY
PUT! Search parties will be sent out once it’s clear someone has not returned to camp
when expected. Yelling or blowing a whistle frequently may be helpful.
• If having to spend the night out becomes a possibility, look for a comfortable place well
before dark. It’s drier under overhangs or thick low-canopied trees. It’s warmer higher
on hills and out of the wind. Put on all clothes and consider covering up with leaves and
branches to create trapped warm air pockets. If you wake up cold in the night, get up and
run in circles or do situps to warm up
• Look for water to drink if you aren’t carrying any.
• Make efforts to be obvious to searchers. Stay in open areas; mark your site with clothing
or a campfire. Stay on or close to trails.
• If in a group, support one another and stay together.
Responding to a Lost Participant or Group
It’s important to establish clear procedures for what to do when someone is missing. This should
include the response that the group leader will provide, when the program should contact their
supervisor at UC, and if/when/how authorities should be notified. Following are some
guidelines for an initial response from a field leader.
• Small scale hasty searches may be warranted during the first hours after someone is
overdue back at camp or a rendezvous point. Searching all of camp, backtracking to the
point last seen, yelling using an established call/response, or attempting to call them on a
cell phone may be enough to find them.
• If the lost party hasn’t arrived for many hours and/or hasn’t checked-in by the morning of
the following day, extensive search efforts should be undertaken and your UC supervisor
should be notified immediately:
o Determine to the best of your ability the point last seen and mark it on a map.
o Study the map and your knowledge of the terrain for clues as to what could have
happened (think about poorly marked trail junctions, difficult terrain, or likely
accidents).
o Divide the search area into segments and establish search teams of 4. Search by
looking, yelling, listening. Leave notes or markers at trails junctions. Make sure
your camp is very visible. Record what you’ve searched.
o Try using a cell phone to call anyone in the lost party. Keep your cell phone on in
case they try to call you.
o Do not search at night.
o Remember to consider the physical and emotional well-being of everyone in your
group. Support each other and give all who want it an active role in helping (even
if just staying back at camp and making a good dinner for everyone).
Avoiding Getting Lost (or Staying Found)
Participants, particularly ones without much field experience, need to be taught early on how to
avoid becoming separated from their group as well as what to do if they become disoriented or
lost.
Guidelines for Staying Found
In and around a field camp:
• Walk your group around camp and establish landmarks and/or handrails that define the
perimeter.
• Establish a simple call and response within your group. If someone feels disoriented
around camp, they can call out and anyone within earshot can respond to help direct them
back to camp. Akin to the “Marco-Polo” game played by kids in a swimming pool, this
can create a fun low-stress way to encourage participants to communicate to their group
before they get completely lost. This also can become an easy way to call your group
together for meetings.
• At night, encourage participants to bring a light and not walk very far from the main
camp.
When leaving camp such as on short day hikes,
• Take some minimal “survival” supplies- such as water, layers, food, maps, flashlight,
basic first aid supplies, fire-making supplies, whistle, cell phone, etc.
• Make sure all individuals or groups inform instructors where they are going, when they
plan to return, who is going with them, and why.
• Encourage participants to pay attention to the landscape around them when out walking:
what cardinal directions are they walking, did they walk up or down hill, what significant
landmarks did they pass or walk beside (streams, cliffs, meadows, etc.)
• Time the walk- this can help determine how long it may take to return to camp
When out on long hikes, do all of the above for short hikes and
• Seriously consider teaching participants basic map/compass skills, GPS-use, etc. before
sending participants far from camp without instructors/leaders.
• Stay together and travel in groups of at least 4. If one person gets injured, one can assist
them while the other 2 can return together to camp to get further help.
• If cell service is available, make a cell-phone contact plan.
• Set clear expectations for what participants should do if they are lost, delayed, or cannot
make it back to camp as planned. (see section below on what to do if lost)
What to do if Disoriented or Lost:
People who become separated from others in a remote outdoor setting tend to panic and often
end up moving hastily in the wrong direction from others and can quickly become truly lost. For
this reason, it’s critical to brief your participants beforehand on what to do if they feel lost or
disoriented.
• Stay calm. Do your best to get your bearings. Look for landmarks. Listen for people.
Yell using the call/response technique described above. Blow a whistle if you have one.
• If you are at all in doubt about where you are and which direction to proceed, STAY
PUT! Search parties will be sent out once it’s clear someone has not returned to camp
when expected. Yelling or blowing a whistle frequently may be helpful.
• If having to spend the night out becomes a possibility, look for a comfortable place well
before dark. It’s drier under overhangs or thick low-canopied trees. It’s warmer higher
on hills and out of the wind. Put on all clothes and consider covering up with leaves and
branches to create trapped warm air pockets. If you wake up cold in the night, get up and
run in circles or do situps to warm up
• Look for water to drink if you aren’t carrying any.
• Make efforts to be obvious to searchers. Stay in open areas; mark your site with clothing
or a campfire. Stay on or close to trails.
• If in a group, support one another and stay together.
Responding to a Lost Participant or Group
It’s important to establish clear procedures for what to do when someone is missing. This should
include the response that the group leader will provide, when the program should contact their
supervisor at UC, and if/when/how authorities should be notified. Following are some
guidelines for an initial response from a field leader.
• Small scale hasty searches may be warranted during the first hours after someone is
overdue back at camp or a rendezvous point. Searching all of camp, backtracking to the
point last seen, yelling using an established call/response, or attempting to call them on a
cell phone may be enough to find them.
• If the lost party hasn’t arrived for many hours and/or hasn’t checked-in by the morning of
the following day, extensive search efforts should be undertaken and your UC supervisor
should be notified immediately:
o Determine to the best of your ability the point last seen and mark it on a map.
o Study the map and your knowledge of the terrain for clues as to what could have
happened (think about poorly marked trail junctions, difficult terrain, or likely
accidents).
o Divide the search area into segments and establish search teams of 4. Search by
looking, yelling, listening. Leave notes or markers at trails junctions. Make sure
your camp is very visible. Record what you’ve searched.
o Try using a cell phone to call anyone in the lost party. Keep your cell phone on in
case they try to call you.
o Do not search at night.
o Remember to consider the physical and emotional well-being of everyone in your
group. Support each other and give all who want it an active role in helping (even
if just staying back at camp and making a good dinner for everyone).